[23667038] According to Mírzá Abu’l-Faḍl (manuscript, p. 41,) the Báb was six or seven years of age when He entered the school of S̱hayḵh ‘Ábid. The school was known by the name of “Qahviyih-Awlíyá.” The Báb remained five years at that school where He was taught the rudiments of Persian. On the first day of the month of Rabí‘u’l-Avval, in the year 1257 A.H., He left for Najaf and Karbilá, returning seven months after to His native province of Fárs. {language="en"}

[23667039] In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful. {language="en"}

[23667040] “The Lord of the Age,” one of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667041] According to Ḥájí Mu‘ínu’s-Salṭanih’s narrative (p. 37), the Báb assumed, at the age of twenty, the independent direction of His business affairs. “Orphaned at an early age, he was placed under the tutelage of his maternal uncle, Áqá Siyyid ‘Alí, under whose direction he entered the same trade in which his father had been engaged (that is to say, the mercantile business).” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 189.) {language="en"}

[23667042] According to Ḥájí Mu‘ínu’s-Salṭanih’s narrative (p. 37), the Báb’s marriage took place when He was twenty-two years of age. {language="en"}

[23667043] The Báb refers to her in his commentary on the Súrih of Joseph (Súrih of Qarábat). The following is A. L. M. Nicolas’ translation of the passage in question: “In truth I have become betrothed before the throne of God with Ṣárá, that is to say, the dearly beloved, because ‘dearly beloved’ is derived from Dearly Beloved (the Dearly Beloved is Muḥammad which signifies that Ṣárá was a Siyyid). In truth I have taken the angels of heaven and those who dwell in Paradise as witnesses of our betrothal.<br>“Know that the benevolence of the Ḏhikr Sublime is great, O dearly beloved! Because it is the benevolence which comes from God, the Beloved. Thou art not like other women if thou obeyest God with regard to the Ḏhikr Sublime. Know the great truth of the Holy Word and glory within thyself that thou art seated with the friend who is the Favorite of the Most High God. Truly the glory comes to thee from God, the Wise. Be patient in the command which comes from God concerning the Báb and his family. Verily, thy son Aḥmad has a refuge in the blessed heaven close to the great Fáṭimih!” (Preface to A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Le Bayán Persan,” vol. 2, pp. 10–11.) {language="en"}

[23667044] The Báb refers to his son in his commentary on the Súrih of Joseph. The following is A. L. M. Nicolas’ translation: “In truth, thy son Aḥmad has a refuge in the Blessed Paradise near to the Great Fáṭimih.” (Súrih of Qarábat.) “Glory be to God Who in truth has given to the ‘Delight of the Eyes,’ in her youth, a son who is named Aḥmad. Verily, we have reared this child toward God!” (Súrih of ‘Abd.) (Preface A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Le Bayán Persan,” vol. 2, p. II.) {language="en"}

[23667045] 1843 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667046] “He left S̱híráz for Bús̱hihr at the age of 17, and remained there for five years engaged in commercial pursuits. During this time he won the esteem of all the merchants with whom he was brought in contact, by his integrity and piety. He was extremely attentive to his religious duties, and gave away large sums to charity. On one occasion he gave 70 túmáns \[about £22\] to a poor neighbour.” (Appendix 2 of Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd: Ḥájí Mírzá Jání’s History, pp. 343–4.) {language="en"}

[23667047] “He was already predisposed to meditation and inclined to be silent, while his fine face, the radiance of his glance as well as his modest and contemplative mien drew, even at that early date, the attention of his fellow-citizens. Though very young, he felt an invincible attraction to matters of religion, for he was barely nineteen when he wrote his first work, the ‘Risáliy-i-Fiqhíyyih’ in which he reveals a true piety and an Islamic effusion, which seemed to predict a brilliant future within the law of S̱hí‘ite orthodoxy. It is probable that this work was written at Bús̱hihr, for he was sent there by his uncle at the age of eighteen or nineteen to look after his business interests.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 188–189.) {language="en"}

[23667048] “The Kas̱hfu’l-G̱hiṭá’” gives the following particulars regarding this remarkable person: “Ḥájí Siyyid Javád himself informed me that he was a resident of Karbilá, that his cousins were well known among the recognised ‘ulamás and doctors of the law in that city and belonged to the Iṯhná-‘As̱harí sect of S̱hí‘ah Islám. In his youth he met S̱hayḵh Aḥmad-i-Aḥsá’í, but was never regarded as his disciple. He was, however, an avowed follower and supporter of Siyyid Káẓim, and ranked among his foremost adherents. He met the Báb in S̱híráz, long before the date ofthe latter’s Manifestation. He saw Him on several occasions which the Báb was only eight or nine years old, in the house of His maternal uncle. He subsequently met Him in Bús̱hihr and stayed for about six months in the same ḵhán in which the Báb and His maternal uncle were residing. Mullá ‘Alíy-i-Basṭámí, one of the Letters of the Living, acquainted him with the Message of the Báb, while in Karbilá, from which city he proceeded to S̱híráz in order to inform himself more fully of the nature of His Revelation.” (Pp- 55–7.) {language="en"}

[23667049] “\[The\] Báb possessed a mild and benignant countenance, his manners were composed and dignified, his eloquence was impressive, and he wrote rapidly and well.” (Lady Sheil’s “Glimpses of Life and Manners in Persia,” p. 178.) {language="en"}

[23667050] “Withdrawn within himself, always absorbed in pious practices, of extreme simplicity of manner, of a fascinating gentleness, those gifts further heightened by his great youth and his marvellous charm, he drew about himself a number of persons who were deeply edified. People then began to speak of his science and of the penetrating eloquence of his discourses. He could not open his lips (we are assured by those who knew him) without stirring the hearts to their very depths.<br>“Speaking, moreover, with a profound reverence regarding the Prophet, the Imáms and their holy companions, he fascinated the severely orthodox while, at the same time, in more intimate addresses, the more ardent and eager minds were happy to find that there was no rigidity in his profession of traditional opinions which they would have found boring. His conversations, on the contrary, opened before them unlimited horizons, varied, colored, mysterious, with shadows broken here and there by patches of blinding light which transported those imaginative people of Persia into a state of ecstasy.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 118.) {language="en"}

[23667051] According to Samandar, who was one of the early believers of Qazvín (manuscript, p. 15), Ṭáhirih’s sister, Marḍíyyih, was the wife of Mírzá Muḥammad-‘Alí, who was one of the Letters of the Living, and who suffered martyrdom at Shaykh Ṭabarsí. Marḍíyyih appears to have recognised and embraced the Message of the Báb (p. 5). Mírzá Muḥammad-‘Alí was the son of Ḥájí Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb, to whom the Báb addressed a Tablet while in the neighbourhood of Qazvín. {language="en"}

[23667052] According to the “Memorials of the Faithful” (pp. 291–8), Ṭáhirih had two sons and one daughter, none of whom recognised the truth of the Cause. Such was the degree of her knowledge and attainment, that her father, Ḥájí Mullá Ṣáliḥ often expressed his regret in the following terms: “Would that she had been a boy for he would have shed illumination upon my household, and would have succeeded me!” She became acquainted with the writings of Shaykh Aḥmad while staying in the home of her cousin, Mullá Javád, from whose library she borrowed these books, and took them over to her home. Her father raised violent objections to her action and, in his heated discussions with her, denounced and criticised the teachings of Shaykh Aḥmad. Ṭáhirih refused to heed the counsels of her father, and engaged in secret correspondence with Siyyid Káẓim, who conferred upon her the name of “Qurratu’l-‘Ayn.” The title of “Ṭáhirih” was first associated with her name while she was staying in Badasht, and was subsequently approved by the Báb. From Qazvín she left for Karbilá, hoping to meet Siyyid Káẓim, but arrived too late, the Siyyid having passed away ten days before her arrival. She joined the companions of the departed leader, and spent her time in prayer and meditation, eagerly expecting the appearance of Him whose advent Siyyid Káẓim had foretold. While in that city, she dreamed a dream. A youth, a Siyyid, wearing a black cloak and a green turban, appeared to her in the heavens, who with upraised hands was reciting certain verses, one of which she noted down in her book. She awoke from her dream greatly impressed by her strange experience. When, later on, a copy of the “Aḥsanu’l-Qiṣaṣ,” the Báb’s commentary on the Súrih of Joseph, reached her, she, to her intense delight, discovered that same verse which she had heard in her dream in that book. That discovery assured her of the truth of the Message which the Author of that work had proclaimed. She herself undertook the translation of the “Aḥsanu’l-Qiṣaṣ” into Persian, and exerted the utmost effort for its spread and interpretation. For three months her house in Karbilá was besieged by the guards whom the Governor had appointed to watch and prevent her from associating with the people. From Karbilá she proceeded to Baghdád, and lived for a time in the house of Shaykh Muḥammad-i-Shibl, from which place she transferred her residence to another quarter, and was eventually taken to the home of the Muftí, where she stayed for about three months. {language="en"}

[23667053] According to the “Kas̱hfu’l-G̱hiṭá’” (p. 93), Ṭáhirih was informed of the Message of the Báb by Mullá ‘Alíy-i-Basṭámí, who visited Karbilá in the year 1260 A.H., after his return from S̱híráz. {language="en"}

[23667054] “One of the most distinguished families of Qazvín — and by this I mean most distinguished by the number of high offices which their various members held in the ecclesiastical hierarchy, as well as by their reputation for science — was, without doubt, the family of Ḥájí Mullá Ṣáliḥ-i-Baraqání who received after his death the title of ‘S̱hahíd-i-Ṯháliṯh’, that is to say, ‘the third martyr.’ We shall review their early history in order to make clear the role which they played in the religious dissensions of Persia, as well as in the catastrophe which was fatally to develop the arrogant character of the brother of Mullá Ṣáliḥ. When the great Mujtahid Áqá Siyyid Muḥammad arrived at Qazvín, someone asked him if Ḥájí Mullá Ṣáliḥ-i-Baraqání was a Mujtahid. ‘Assuredly,’ replied the Siyyid, and that all the more so since Ṣáliḥ was one of his former students who towards the last had followed the teachings of Áqá Siyyid ‘Alí. ‘Very well,’ replied his questioner, ‘but his brother Muḥammad-Taqí, is he also worthy of the sacred title?’ Áqá Siyyid Muḥammad replied by praising the qualities and the science of Taqí but avoiding a precise answer to the direct question put to him. However, this did not prevent the questioner from spreading abroad in the city the news that Siyyid Muḥammad himself acknowledged Taqí as a Master whom he had declared Mujtahid in his presence.<br>“Now Siyyid Muḥammad had gone to live with one of his colleagues, Ḥájí Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb. The latter learned quickly of the news which was thus noised abroad and he immediately summoned before him the questioner of the Siyyid whom he reproached severely in the presence of witnesses. Naturally, the rumor spread from tongue to tongue until it reached Taqí, who became furious and declared each time he heard the name of Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb, — ‘I only respect him because he is the son of my blessed Master.’<br>“Siyyid Muḥammad, having been informed of all these incidents and of all the rumors, and realizing that he had saddened the heart of Taqí, came one day to invite him to luncheon; he treated him with great respect, wrote for him his brevet of Mujtahid and, this same day, accompanied him to the Mosque. The prayer over, he sat down on the steps of the pulpit where he spoke the praises of Taqí and confirmed him in his new dignity, in the presence of the entire assembly. It happened that, a little later, S̱hayḵh Aḥmad-i-Aḥsá’í passed through Qazvín. This personage, said to be the very pious author of ‘Qiṣaṣu’l-‘Ulamá’, was declared impious because he had endeavored to reconcile philosophy and religious law, ‘and everyone knows that in most cases to try to blend religious law with intelligence is an impossibility.’ Be that as it may, S̱hayḵh Aḥmad rose high above his contemporaries, many men sharing his opinions. He had followers in all the cities of Persia and the S̱háh Fatḥ-‘Alí treated him with great deference, while Áḵhúnd Mullá ‘Alí said of him, ‘He is an ignorant man with a pure heart.’<br>“While in Qazvín, he sojourned in the house of Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb who was henceforth to be the enemy of the Baraqání family. He went to worship in the Mosque of the parish and the ‘ulamás of Qazvín came to pray under his guidance. He naturally returned all the visits and courtesies extended to him by these holy men, was on good terms with them and soon it became known that his host was one of his disciples. One day he went to call upon Ḥájí Mullá Taqí-i-Baraqání who received him apparently with profound respect, but took advantage of the opportunity to ask him some insidious questions. ‘Regarding the resurrection of the dead on the Day of Judgment,’ he asked, ‘do you share the opinion of Mullá Ṣadrá?’ ‘No,’ replied S̱hayḵh Aḥmad. Then Taqí, calling his youngest brother Ḥájí Mullá ‘Alí, said: ‘Go to my library and bring me the S̱haváhid-i-Rubúbíyyih of Mullá Ṣadrá.’ Then, as Ḥájí Mullá was slow to return, he said to S̱hayḵh Aḥmad: ‘Although I do not agree with you on this subject, I am nevertheless curious to know your opinion on the matter.’ The S̱hayḵh replied, ‘Nothing would be easier. My conviction is that the resurrection will not take place with our material bodies but with their essence, and by essence I mean, for example, the glass which is potentially in the stone.’<br>“Excuse me,’ Taqí replied maliciously, ‘but this essence is different from the material body and you know that it is a dogma in our holy religion to believe in the resurrection of the material body.’ The S̱hayḵh remained silent and it was in vain that one of his pupils, a native of Turkistán, endeavored to divert the conversation by starting a discussion which was likely to be a lengthy one, but the blow was dealt and S̱hayḵh Aḥmad withdrew, convinced that he had been compromised. It was not long before he realized that his conversation had been carefully related by Taqí for, that very day, when he went to the Mosque to pray he was followed only by ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb. A misunderstanding was broiling and threatened to break, but ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb, thinking he had found a way to smooth things over and remove all the difficulties, entreated his Master to write and publish a book in which he would affirm the resurrection of the material body. But he had not taken into account the hatred of Taqí. In fact, S̱hayḵh Aḥmad did write the treatise, which still may be found in his book entitled ‘Ajvibatu’l-Masá’il’ but no one cared to read it and his impiety was noised abroad increasingly from day to day. It came to the point where the Governor of the city, Prince ‘Alí-Naqí Mírzá Ruknu’d-Dawlih, considering the importance of the personages involved in the controversy and afraid of being blamed for allowing this dissension to grow, resolved to bring about an agreement.<br>“One night, he invited all the celebrated ‘Ulamás of the city to a great banquet. S̱hayḵh Aḥmad was given the seat of honor and close to him, only separated by one person, was Taqí. Platters were brought, prepared for three people, so that the two enemies found that they were obliged to eat together, but the irreconcilable Taqí turned toward the platter of his neighbors on his right hand and to the great consternation of the Prince, he placed his left hand over the left side of his face in such a manner that he could not possibly see S̱hayḵh Aḥmad. After the banquet which proved rather dull, the Prince, still determined to reconcile the two adversaries, bestowed great praise on S̱hayḵh Aḥmad, acknowledging him as the great Arabian and Persian Doctor and saying that Taqí should show him the greatest respect; that it was not proper for him to give ear to the gossip of men eager to create conflict between two exceptional minds. Taqí interrupted him violently and declared with great contempt, ‘There can be no peace between impiety and faith! Concerning the resurrection the S̱hayḵh holds a doctrine opposed to the religion of Islám, (Islamic law) therefore, whoever holds such a doctrine is an impious one and what can such a rebel and I have in common?’<br>“The Prince insisted and entreated in vain, but Taqí refused to yield and they all adjourned.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 263–267.) {language="en"}

[23667055] Third Martyr. {language="en"}

[23667056] “Mullá Ṣáliḥ had among his children a daughter, Zarrín-Táj (Crown of Gold), who had attracted attention from early childhood. Instead of taking part in games and amusements like her companions, she passed hours at a time listening to her parents discuss religious matters. Her keen intelligence quickly perceived the fallacies of Islamic science without succumbing to it and soon she was able to discuss points which were most obscure and confusing. The Hadíṯhs (traditions) held no secrets for her. Her reputation soon became widely known in the city and her fellow-citizens considered her a prodigy, and justly so. A prodigy in science, also a prodigy of beauty, for the child, as she grew to girlhood, possessed a face which shone with such radiant beauty that they named her ‘Qurratu’l-‘Ayn’, which M. de Gobineau translates as ‘The Consolation of the Eyes.’ Her brother ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb-i-Qazvíní who inherited the learning and reputation of his father, himself relates, in spite of the fact that he remained, at least in appearance, a Muḥammadan: ‘None of us, her brothers or her cousins dared to speak in her presence, her learning so intimidated us, and if we ventured to express some hypothesis upon a disputed point of doctrine, she demonstrated in such a clear, precise and conclusive manner that we were going astray, that we instantly withdrew confused.’<br>“She was present at her father’s and uncle’s classes, in the same room with two or three hundred students, but always concealed behind a curtain, and more than once she refuted the explanation that these two elderly men offered upon such and such a question. Her reputation became universal throughout all Persia, and the most haughty ‘Ulamás consented to adopt some of her hypotheses and opinions. This fact is all the more extraordinary because the S̱hí‘ite Muḥammadan religion relegates the woman almost to the level of the animal. They consider that she has no soul and exists merely for reproduction.<br>“Qurratu’l-‘Ayn married, when still quite young, the son of her uncle, Muḥammad-i-Qazvíní who was the Imám-Jum‘ih of the city and later she went to Karbilá where she attended the classes of Siyyid Káẓim-i-Ras̱htí. She shared with enthusiasm the ideas of her Master, ideas with which she was already familiar, the city of Qazvín having become a center for the S̱hayḵhí doctrine.<br>“She was, as we shall see later, of an ardent temperament, of a precise and clear intelligence, of a marvellous presence of mind and indomitable courage. All of these qualities combined were to bring her to take interest in the Báb whom she heard speak immediately after his return to Qazvín. That which she learned interested her so vitally that she began corresponding with the Reformer and soon, convinced by him, she made known her conversion urbi et orbi. The scandal was very great and the clergy were shocked. In vain, her husband, her father and her brothers pleaded with her to renounce this dangerous madness, but she remained inflexible and proclaimed resolutely her faith.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 273–274.) {language="en"}

[23667057] “‘This name comes to them,’ said Ḥájí Karím Ḵhán in his Hidáyatu’ṭ-Ṭálibín, ‘from the fact that the late S̱hayḵh Aḥmad, being at Karbilá during his pilgrimages to the holy tombs, and out of respect for the Imáms, recited his prayers standing behind the Imám, that is to say, at his feet. In fact, for him there was no difference between the respect to be tendered to a dead Imám or a living Imám. The Persians, on the contrary, when entering into the tomb, placed themselves at the head of the Imám and consequently turned their backs to him when they prayed because the dead saints are buried with their heads towards the Qiblih. This is a disgrace and a lie! The apostles of Jesus pretending to have come to the assistance of God, were called ‘Nasara,’ a name which was given to all those who followed in their footsteps. It is thus that the name of Bálá-Sarí extended to all that follow the doctrine of those who pray standing at the head of the Imám.’” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Essai sur le S̱hayḵhisme,” I, preface, pp. 5–6.) {language="en"}

[23667058] 1850–51 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667059] According to Muḥammad Muṣṭafá (p. 106), Mullá ‘Alí suffered six months’ imprisonment in Bag̱hdád by order of Najíb Pás̱há, the governor of the city. He was thence ordered to leave for Constantinople, according to instructions received from the Ottoman government. He passed through Mosul, where he was able to awaken interest in the new Revelation. His friends were, however, unable to discover whether he eventually reached his destination. {language="en"}

[23667060] The Qur’án. {language="en"}

[23667061] The Qur’án. {language="en"}

[23667062] The Qur’án. {language="en"}

[23667063] One of the Báb’s titles. {language="en"}

[23667064] The Báb refers to the Letters of the Living in the Persian Bayán (Váḥid I, Báb 2) in the following terms: “All of these formed the name of the Living One, for these are the names that are the nearest to God; the others are guided by their clear and significant actions, for God began the creation of the Bayán through them, and it is to them that the creation of the Bayán will again return. They are the lights which in the past have eternally prostrated themselves and will prostrate themselves eternally in the future, before the celestial throne.” (“Le Bayán Persan,” vol. 1, pp. 24–25.) {language="en"}

[23667065] A. L. M. Nicolas, in his introduction to volume I of “Le Bayán Persan” (pp. 3–5), writes as follows: “Everyone agrees in acknowledging that it would be absolutely impossible for him to proclaim loudly his doctrine or to spread it among men. He had to act as does a physician to children, who must disguise a bitter medicine in a sweet coating in order to win over his young patients. The people in the midst of whom he appeared were, and still are, alas, more fanatical than the Jews were at the time of Jesus, when the majesty of Roman peace was no longer there to put a stop to the furious excesses of religious madness of an over-excited people. Therefore, if Christ, in spite of the relative calm of the surroundings in which He preached, thought it necessary to employ the parable, Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad, a fortiori, was obliged to disguise his thought in numerous circuitous ways and only pour out, one drop at a time, the filter of his divine truths. He brings up his child, Humanity; he guides it, endeavoring always not to frighten it and directs its first steps on a path which leads it slowly but surely, so that, as soon as it can proceed alone, it reaches the goal pre-ordained for it from all eternity.” {language="en"}

[23667066] “In crowds they gathered to hear the teacher. He occupied in turn all the pulpits of Iṣfahán where he was free to speak publicly and to announce that Mírzá ‘Alí-Muḥammad was the twelfth Imám, the Imám Mihdí. He displayed and read his Master’s books and would reveal their eloquence and their depth, emphasizing the extreme youthfulness of the seer and telling of his miracles.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 130.) {language="en"}

[23667067] ‘Behold the land of Ṣád (Iṣfahán) which in this world of appearances is the greatest of lands. In every one of its schools, numerous slaves are found who bear the name of savants and contestants. At the time of the election of members, even a sifter of grain may put on the garb of primacy (above the others). It is here that the secret of the word of the Imáms, regarding the Manifestation, shines forth: “The lowliest of the creatures shall become the most exalted, and the most exalted shall become the most debased.’” (“The Bayán Persan,” vol. 4, p. 113.) {language="en"}

[23667068] Reference to ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s marriage with Munírih Ḵhánum. {language="en"}

[23667069] Gobineau (p. 129) mentions Mullá Muḥammad-Taqíy-i-Harátí, a well-known juris-consult, as one of the earliest converts to the Faith. {language="en"}

[23667070] “The sojourn of Bus̱hrú’í in Iṣfahán proved a triumph for the Báb. The conversions that he performed were numerous and brilliant; but, such are the ways of the world, that they drew down upon him the fierce hatred of the official clergy to which he was obliged to yield and he withdrew from that city. In fact, the conversion of Mullá Muḥammad-Taqíy-i-Harátí, a jurist of the first rank, brought their fury to a climax, because over-flowing with zeal as he was, he would go every day to the minbar where he talked to men openly of the greatness of the Báb to whom he gave the rank of Ná’ib-i-ḵháṣṣ of the twelfth Imám.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 255.) {language="en"}

[23667071] According to the “Kas̱hfu’l-G̱hiṭá’” (pp. 42–5), Ḥájí Mírzá Jání was known by the people of Kás̱hán as Ḥájí Mírzá Jáníy-i-Buzurg in order to distinguish him from his namesake, who was also a merchant of Kás̱hán, known by the name of Ḥájí Mírzá Jáníy-i-Turk, or Kúc̱hiq. The former had three brothers the eldest was named Ḥájí Muḥammad-Ismá‘íl-i-Ḏhabíḥ, the second Ḥájí Mírzá Aḥmad, the third Ḥájí ‘Alí-Akbar. {language="en"}

[23667072] “He passed several days in that capital but he did not appear in public. He limited himself to confidential conversations with those who visited him. He thus received many and won over to his doctrine a fairly large number of enquirers. Each one wished to see him, or to have seen him, and the King, Muḥammad S̱háh and his Minister, Ḥájí Mírzá Áqásí, true Persians as they were, did not fail to have him brought before them. He laid before them his doctrine and gave to them the Books of the Master.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 131.) {language="en"}

[23667073] According to Samandar (manuscript, p. 2), Mullá Ḥusayn, on his way from S̱híráz to Ṭihrán in the year 1260 A.H., was the bearer of a Tablet revealed by the Báb for Muḥammad S̱háh. {language="en"}

[23667074] “On one occasion,” writes Dr. J. E. Esslemont, “‘Abdu’l-Bahá, the eldest son of Bahá’u’lláh, related to the writer the following particulars about His Father’s early days: ‘From childhood He was extremely kind and generous. He was a great lover of outdoor life, most of His time being spent in the garden or the fields. He had an extraordinary power of attraction, which was felt by all. People always crowded around Him. Ministers and people of the Court would surround Him, and the children also were devoted to Him. When He was only thirteen or fourteen years old He became renowned for His learning…. When Bahá’u’lláh was twenty-two years old, His father died, and the Government wished Him to succeed to His father’s position in the Ministry as was customary in Persia, but Bahá’u’lláh did not accept the offer. Then the Prime Minister said: “Leave him to himself. Such a position is unworthy of him. He has some higher aim in view. I cannot understand him, but I am convinced that he is destined for some lofty career. His thoughts are not like ours. Let him alone.”’” (“Bahá’u’lláh and the New Era,” pp. 29–30.) {language="en"}

[23667075] Tea and that variety of sugar being extremely rare in Persia at that time, both were used as gifts among the higher classes of the population. {language="en"}

[23667076] The kuláh, a lambskin hat, differentiated the clergy from the laity, and was worn invariably by State officials. {language="en"}

[23667077] “His \[Bahá’u’lláh’s\] speech was like a ‘rushing torrent’ and his clearness in exposition brought the most learned divines to his feet.” (Dr. T. K. Cheyne’s “The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” p. 120.) {language="en"}

[23667078] The numerical value of the word “váḥid,” which means “unity,” is 19\. {language="en"}

[23667079] The numerical value of “Kull-i-S̱hay’,” which means “all things,” is 361, or 19 X 19\. {language="en"}

[23667080] “The pilgrim, as was customary with him, would make the most of his stay which he would prolong if need be, in the villages, towns and cities on his way, in order to hold conferences, to speak against the Mullás, to make known the Books of the Báb and to preach his doctrines. He was summoned everywhere and waited for impatiently; he was sought after with curiosity, listened to eagerly and believed with little difficulty.<br>“It was at Nís̱hápúr above all, that he made two important conversions in the persons of Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Ḵháliq of Yazd, and of Mullá ‘Alí the Young. The first of these Doctors had been the pupil of S̱hayḵh Aḥmad-i-Aḥsá’í. He was a person celebrated for his science, for his eloquence and for his standing among the people. The other, a S̱hayḵh like the first, a man of strict ethics and high understanding, held the important position of the principal mujtahid of the city. Both became ardent Bábís. They made the pulpits of the Mosques resound with violent denunciations of Islám.<br>“During several weeks, it seemed as though the old religion had been completely defeated. The clergy, demoralized by the defection of their chief and frightened by the public addresses which did not spare them, either dared not show themselves or had taken flight. When Mullá Ḥusayn-i-Bus̱hrú’í came to Mas̱hhad he found, on the one hand, the population stirred up and divided about him, on the other hand, the clergy forewarned and very anxious, but exasperated and determined to oppose a vigorous resistance to the attacks about to be launched against them.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 139–140.) {language="en"}

[23667081] Corresponding with the night preceding the 10th of October, 1844 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667082] The Laylatu’l-Qadr, meaning literally “Night of Power,” is one of the last ten nights of Ramaḍán, and, as is commonly believed, the seventh of those nights reckoning backward. {language="en"}

[23667083] According to Ḥájí Mu‘ínu’s-Salṭanih’s narrative (p. 72), the Báb set out on His pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina in the month of S̱havvál, 1260 A.H. (Oct., 1844 A.D.). {language="en"}

[23667084] “He retained the most disagreeable impression of his voyage. ‘Know that the sea voyages are hard. We do not favor them for the faithful; travel by land,’ he wrote in the Kitáb-i-Baynu’l-Ḥaramayn in addressing himself to his uncle, as we shall soon see. He elaborates upon this subject also in the Bayán. Do not consider this childish, the feelings which moved the Báb in his horror of the sea are far more noble.<br>“Struck by the selfishness of the pilgrims which was heightened by the discomforts of a long and dangerous sea voyage, equally shocked by the unclean conditions that the pilgrims were obliged to endure on board, he wished to prevent men from yielding to their lower instincts and treating one another harshly. We know that the Báb especially commended politeness and the most refined courtesy in all social relations. ‘Never sadden anyone, no matter whom, for no matter what,’ he enjoined, and during this voyage he experienced the meanness of man and his brutality when in the presence of difficulties. ‘The saddest thing that I saw on my pilgrimage to Mecca was the constant disputes of the pilgrims between themselves, disputes which took away the moral benefit of the pilgrimage.’ (Bayán, 4:16.)<br>“In time he arrived at Mascate where he rested for several days during which he sought to convert the people of that country but without success. He spoke to one among them, a religious man probably, one of high rank, whose conversion might also have been followed by that of his fellow citizens, at least so I believe, though he gives us no details upon this subject. Evidently he did not attempt to convert the first comer who would have had no influence on the other inhabitants of the city. That he attempted a conversion and did not succeed is an indisputable fact because he himself affirms it: ‘The mention of God, in truth, descended upon the earth of Mascate and made the way of God come to one of the inhabitants of the country. It may be possible that he understood our verses and became one of those who are guided. Say: This man obeyed his passions after having read our verses and in truth this man is by the rules of the Book, among the transgressors. Say: We have not seen in Mascate men of the Book willing to help him, because they are lost in ignorance. And the same was true of all these voyagers on the boat with the exception of one who believed in our verses and became one of those who fear God.’” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 207–208.) {language="en"}

[23667085] “It is thus that I myself saw, on the voyage to Mecca, a notable who was spending considerable sums of money but who hesitated to spend the price of a glass of water for his fellow-traveler. This happened on the boat where the water was scarce, so scarce in fact, during the voyage from Bús̱hihr to Mascate, which lasted twelve days with no opportunity to get water, that I had to content myself with sweet lemons.” (“Le Bayán Persan,” vol. 2, p. 154.)<br>“One cannot imagine on the sea anything but discomfort. One cannot have all the necessities as in land travel. The mariners are obliged to live thus but by their services they come nearer to God, and God rewards actions performed on the land and on the sea but He grants a two-fold recompense for those services accomplished by one of the servants on the sea, because their work is more arduous.” (Ibid., pp. 155–156.)<br>“I have seen (on the way to Mecca) acts of the vilest kind, in the eyes of God, which were sufficient to undo the good resulting from the pilgrimage. These were the quarrels among the pilgrims! Verily, the House of God has no need of such people!” (Ibid., p. 155.) {language="en"}

[23667086] The day preceding the festival. {language="en"}

[23667087] December, 1844 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667088] Verses of the Qur’án. {language="en"}

[23667089] “The Epistle between the Two Shrines.” {language="en"}

[23667090] 1850–51 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667091] July, 1850 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667092] Friday, January 30, 1845 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667093] Similar to a caravanserai. {language="en"}

[23667094] Literally meaning “The Seven Qualifications.” {language="en"}

[23667095] Refer to Glossary. {language="en"}

[23667096] Reference to the name of the Báb. {language="en"}

[23667097] Reference to Bahá’u’lláh. Refer to Glossary. {language="en"}

[23667098] According to the “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd” (p. 204), he was also styled “Niẓámu’d-Dawlih.” {language="en"}

[23667099] “One of the tribes of Túrán, a Turkish family, called the Qájár, which first appeared in Persia in the invading army of C̱hangíz Ḵhán.” (C. R. Markham’s “A General Sketch of the History of Persia,” p. 339.) {language="en"}

[23667100] According to A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb” (footnote 175, p. 225), this meeting took place on August 6, 1845 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667101] According to the “Traveller’s Narrative” (p. 5), a certain Mullá ‘Alí-Akbar-i-Ardistání was, together with them, subjected to the same persecution. {language="en"}

[23667102] Qur’án, 3:193\. {language="en"}

[23667103] “This city became the arena for passionate discussions which profoundly troubled the general peace. The curious, the pilgrims, the scandal-mongers met there commenting upon the news, approving or blaming, exalting the young Siyyid, or, on the contrary, heaping upon him maledictions and insults. Everyone was excited and enervated. The Mullás saw with bitter anxiety the growing number of adherents to the new doctrine and their resources diminished correspondingly. It became necessary to act, as prolonged tolerance would empty the Mosques of their believers who were convinced that since Islám did not defend itself, it acknowledged defeat. On the other hand, Ḥusayn Ḵhán, governor of S̱híráz, Niẓámu’d-Dawlih, feared that, in letting things drift, the scandal would become such that later it would be impossible to suppress it; that would be to court disgrace. Besides, the Báb did not content himself with preaching, he called to himself men of good-will. ‘He who knows the Word of God and does not come to His assistance in the days of violence is exactly like those who turned away from the testimony of his holiness Ḥusayn, son of ‘Alí, at Karbilá. Those are the impious ones!’ (Kitáb-i-Baynu’l-Ḥaramayn.) The civil interests concurring with the interests of heaven, Niẓámu’d-Dawlih and S̱hayḵh Abú-Turáb, the Imám-Jum‘ih agreed that humiliation should be inflicted upon the innovator such as would discredit him in the eyes of the populace; perhaps thus they might succeed in quieting things.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 229–230.) {language="en"}

[23667104] Qur’án, 49:6\. {language="en"}

[23667105] “Following this public seance provoked by the folly of the Mullás and which won for him numerous partisans, the trouble became serious in all the provinces of Persia; the dispute grew into such a grave situation that Muḥammad S̱háh sent to S̱híráz a man in whom he had complete confidence, instructing him to make a report of everything he saw and understood. This envoy was Siyyid Yaḥyáy-i-Dárábí.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 232–233.) {language="en"}

[23667106] March, 1845 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667107] 1850–51 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667108] “Be that as it may, the resultant impression was immense in S̱híráz and all the learned and religious gathered around ‘Alí-Muḥammad. As soon as he appeared in the Mosque, they surrounded him and, as soon as he was seated in the pulpit, everyone was silent in order to listen to him. His public talks never attacked the essentials of the Faith of Islám, they respected most of its ritual; in fact, the Kitman dominated. Nevertheless, they were daring discourses. The clergy was not spared; its vices were cruelly lashed. The sad and painful destiny of humanity was generally the theme. Here and there, certain allusions, the obscurity of which irritated the passions of some while it flattered the pride of others already initiated as a whole or only in part, gave to his prophecies such a bitter truth that the crowd was growing day by day and so, in all Persia, they were beginning to talk of ‘Alí-Muḥammad.<br>“The Mullás of S̱híráz had not waited for all this agitation to unite against this young detractor. From his first public appearances, they sent to him their most able Mullás to argue with him and confuse him, and these public debates were held either in the Mosques or in the colleges in the presence of the Governor, the military chiefs, the clergy, the people, in fact before everyone. But, instead of benefiting the clergy, they contributed quite a little to spread and exalt, at their own expense, the renown of this enthusiastic teacher. It is a fact that he defeated his adversaries, he condemned them — which was not very difficult — with the Qur’án in hand. It was an easy matter for him to show before all these crowds who knew the Mullás well, at which point their conduct, their precepts, and to what extent their beliefs, even their theology, were in flagrant contradiction with the Book, which they could not deny.<br>“Possessed of extraordinary daring and exaltation, he flayed unsparingly the vices of his antagonists, disregarding all ordinary conventions. After having proven their infidelity to their own doctrine, he shamed them in their lives and threw them at pitch and toss to the indignation or the contempt of the auditors.<br>“At S̱híráz, his first appearances, when he preached, were so profoundly moving that even the orthodox Muḥammadans who were present have retained an indelible memory of them and never recall them without a sort of terror. They agreed unanimously that the eloquence of ‘Alí-Muḥammad was of an incomparable kind, such that, without having been an eye-witness, one could not possibly imagine. Soon the young theologian no longer appeared in public without being surrounded with many partisans. His house was always filled with them and he not only taught in the Mosques and in the colleges, but it was principally at his house and in the evenings that, withdrawn in a room with the elite of his admirers, he lifted for them the veils of a doctrine which even for himself he had not yet fully established.<br>“It seemed in these early days that he was occupied with polemics rather than with dogmatic statements and nothing is more natural. In these secret talks, his bold declarations which were much more frequent than in the public addresses, grew each day and tended so clearly to a complete overthrow of Islám that they were a prelude to a new profession of Faith. The little congregation was ardent, brave, carried away, ready for anything; they were fanatical in the true and noble sense of the word, that is to say, that every one of its members thought himself of no importance and burned with a desire to sacrifice his life-blood and his belongings for the cause of Truth.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 120, 122.)<br>“These ethics taught by a young man at an age when passions were intense, deeply impressed an audience, religious to the point of fanaticism, above all when the words of the preacher were in perfect harmony with his conduct. No one doubted the continence and the firmness of Karbilá’í Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad; he spoke little, meditated constantly and most of the time fled from the presence of men, which all the more aroused their curiosity. He was sought after everywhere.” (Journal Asiatique, 1866, tome 7, p. 341.)<br>“By the uprightness of his life the young Siyyid served as an example to those about him. He was willingly listened to when, in his ambiguous and interrupted talks, he condemned the abuses evident in all classes of society. His words were repeated and elaborated upon and they spoke of him as the true Master and gave themselves to him unreservedly.” (Ibid.) {language="en"}

[23667109] Refer to Glossary. {language="en"}

[23667110] Refer to Glossary. {language="en"}

[23667111] Qur’án, 4:50\. {language="en"}

[23667112] The night preceding February 13, 1840 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667113] 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667114] “Bábism had many adepts in all classes of society, and many among them were of important standing; great lords, members of the clergy, military men and merchants had accepted this doctrine.” (Journal Asiatique, 1866, tome 8, p. 251.) {language="en"}

[23667115] Refer to “Pedigree of the Qájár Dynasty” at the beginning of the book. {language="en"}

[23667116] Concerning him, ‘Abdu’l-Bahá has written the following: “This remarkable man, this precious soul, had committed to memory no less than thirty thousand traditions, and was highly esteemed and admired by all classes of people. He had achieved universal renown in Persia, and his authority and erudition were widely and fully recognized.” (From manuscript relating to martyrdoms in Persia.)<br>“This personage was, as his name indicates, born at Dáráb near S̱híráz; his father, Siyyid Ja‘far, surnamed Kas̱hfí, was one of the greatest and most celebrated ‘Ulamás of that period. His high moral character, his righteous ways had attracted to him universal esteem and consideration. His science had won for him the glorious name of Kas̱hfí, that is to say, one who discovers and explains the divine secrets. Brought up by him, his son was not slow to equal him in every way and he enjoyed the public favor bestowed on his father. When he went to Ṭihrán, he was preceded by his fame and popularity. He became the regular guest of Prince Tahmásp Mírzá, Mu’ayyadu’d-Dawlih, grandson of Fatḥ-‘Alí S̱háh by his father Muḥammad-‘Alí Mírzá. The government itself paid homage to his science and to his merit and he was consulted more than once in trying circumstances. It was of him that Muḥammad S̱hah and Ḥájí Mírzá Áqásí thought when they wished to find an honest emissary whose faithfulness could not be questioned.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 233.)<br>“While these events were taking place in the north of Persia, the central and southern provinces were deeply roused by the fiery eloquence of the missionaries of the new doctrine. The people, light, credulous, ignorant, superstitious in the extreme, were struck dumb by the incessant miracles which they heard related every moment; the anxious priests, feeling their flock quivering with impatience and ready to escape their control, redoubled their slanders and infamous imputations; the grossest lies, the most bloody fictions were spread among the bewildered populace, torn between horror and admiration…. Siyyid Ja‘far was unacquainted with the doctrine of the S̱hayḵhís as he was with those of Mullá Ṣadrá. Nevertheless, his burning zeal and his ardent imagination had carried him, towards the end of his life, out of the ways of the orthodox S̱hí‘ite. He interpreted the ‘ḥadíṯh’ differently from his colleagues and claimed even, so they said, to have fathomed the seventy inner meanings of the Qur’án. His son, who was to outdo these oddities, was at that time about thirty-five years of age. After the completion of his studies, he came to Ṭihrán where he became intimately associated with all that the court counted of great personages and distinguished men. It was upon him that the choice of His Majesty fell. He was, therefore, commissioned to go to S̱híráz to make contact with the Báb and to inform the central authority, as exactly as possible, of the political consequences which would result from a reform which seemed likely to unsettle the heart of the country.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 387–388.) {language="en"}

[23667117] Qur’án, 108\. {language="en"}

