[23667598] January 12,1853 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667599] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá. {language="en"}

[23667600] Mírzá Músá, commonly called Áqáy-i-Kalím, the ablest and most distinguished among Bahá’u’lláh’s brothers and sisters, and His staunch and valued supporter. {language="en"}

[23667601] Mírzá Abu’l-Faḍl quotes in his “Fará’id” (pp. 50–51), the following remarkable tradition from Muḥammad, which is recognised as an authentic utterance of the Prophet and to which Siyyid ‘Abdu’l-Vahháb-i-S̱ha‘rání refers in his work entitled “Kitábu’l-Yaváqít-i-va’l-Javáhir”: “All of them \[the companions of the Qá’im\] shall be slain except One who shall reach the plain of ‘Akká, the Banquet-Hall of God.” The full text is also mentioned, according to Mírzá Abu’l-Faḍl, by S̱hayḵh Ibnu’l-‘Arabí in his “Futúḥát-i-Makkíyyih.” {language="en"}

[23667602] “‘A hollow receptacle of about the size and shape of a cocoa-nut, round the orifice of which two chains are attached at four points to serve as a handle. It is used by dervishes as an alms-basket.” (“A Traveller’s Narrative,” p. 51, note 3.) {language="en"}

[23667603] “Excellency, After the carrying out of those energetic measures on the part of the Persian Government for the extirpation and extermination of the misguided and detestable sect of the Bábís, with the details of which Your Excellency is fully acquainted \[allusion is made to the great persecution of the Bábís in Ṭihrán in the summer of 1852\], praise be to God, by the attention of the Imperial mind of is most potent Majesty, whose rank is as that of Jams̱híd, the refuge of the True Religion — may our lives be his sacrifice! — , their roots were torn up.” (Extract from letter addressed by Mírzá Sa‘íd Ḵhán, ex-foreign minister of Persia; to the Persian ambassador in Constantinople; dated 12th of 12th Ḏhu’l-Ḥijjih, 1278 \[May 10, 1862\]. Facsimile and translation of the document reproduced in E. G. Browne’s “Materials for the Study of the Bábí Religion,” p. 283.) {language="en"}

[23667604] “It was a terrible journey in rough mountain country and the travellers suffered greatly from exposure.” (Dr. T. K. Cheyne’s “The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” p. 121.) {language="en"}

[23667605] “But just as remarkable as his boldness in claiming Divine authority is his restraint in insisting that his authority was not final. He felt competent and commissioned to reveal much, but he felt with equal certainty that there was infinitely more yet to be revealed. Herein was his greatness. And herein was his greatest sacrifice. He thereby risked the diminution of his personal fame. But he insured the continuance of his mission…. He insured that the movement he had started would grow and expand. He himself was but ‘a letter out of that most mighty book, a dewdrop from that limitless ocean.’… This was the humility of true insight. And it had its effect. His movement has grown and expanded, and it has yet a great future before it.” (Sir Francis Younghusband’s “The Gleam,” pp. 210–11.) {language="en"}

[23667606] “During the days when I was imprisoned in the Land of Ṭá \[Ṭihrán\], although the galling weight of chains and the loathsome atmosphere of the prison allowed me little sleep, yet occasionally, in my moments of slumber, I felt as if something were pouring forth over breast, even as a mighty torrent, which, descending from the Summit of a lofty mountain precipitates itself over the earth. All my limbs seemed to have been set aflame. At such moments my tongue recited what mortal ears could not hear.” (“The Epistle to the Son of the Wolf,” p. 17.) {language="en"}

[23667607] Gobineau, writing in about the year 1865, testifies as follows: “Public opinion holds that the Bábís are to be found in every social class and among the members of every religion, with the exception of the Nuṣayrís and the Christians, but it is especially the educated classes, the men of learning who are suspected of sympathy with Bábism. It is believed, and with good reason, that many mullás and, among them, outstanding mujtahids, magistrates of high rank, and high court officials very close to the king, are Bábís. According to a recent estimate, there would be in Ṭihrán, a city of about eighty thousand souls, five thousand Bábís. But this estimate is not very reliable and I am inclined to think that, if the Bábís were to triumph in Persia, their number in the capital would be much larger, for, at that moment, one would have to add to the number of the zealous ones, whatever that number may now be, a large proportion of those who are recently in favor of the officially condemned doctrine and to whom victory would impart the courage to declare their faith openly.” (Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 251.) “Half a century has not yet elapsed since Mírzá ‘Alí-Muḥammad, the young Seer of S̱híráz, first began to preach the religion which now counts its martyrs by hundreds and its adherents by hundreds of thousands; which seemed at one time to menace the supremacy alike of the Qájár dynasty and of the Muḥammadan faith in Persia, and may still not improbably prove an important factor in the history of Western Asia.” (E. G. Browne’s introduction to the “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” p. 7.) “Bábism,” writes Professor James Darmesteter, “which diffused itself in less than five years from one end of Persia to another, which was bathed in 1852 in the blood of its martyrs, has been silently progressing and propagating itself. If Persia is to be at all regenerate it will be through this new faith.” (Extract from “Persia: A Historical and Literary Sketch,” translated by G. K. Nariman.) “If Bábism continues to grow at its present rate of progression, a time may conceivably come when it will oust Muḥammadanism from the field in Persia. This, I think, it would be unlikely to do, did it appear upon the ground under the flag of a hostile faith. But since its recruits are won from the best soldiers of the garrison whom it is attacking, there is greater reason to believe that it may ultimately prevail. To those who know anything of the Persian character, so extraordinarily susceptible of religious influences as it is, it will be obvious to how many classes in that country the new creed makes successful appeal. The Ṣúfís, or mystics, have long held that there must always be a Pír, or Prophet, visible in the flesh, and are very easily absorbed into the Bábí fold. Even the orthodox Musulmán, whose mind’s eye has ever been turned in eager anticipation upon the vanished Imám, is amenable to the cogent reasoning, by which it is sought to prove that either the Báb, or Bahá, is the Mihdí, according to all the predictions of the Qur’án and the traditions. The pure and suffering life of the Báb, his ignominious death, the heroism and martyrdom of his followers, will appeal to many others who can find no similar phenomena in the contemporaneous records of Islám.” (Lord Curzon’s “Persia and the Persian Question,” vol. 1, p. 503.) The author, in the same chapter, commenting on the prospects of Christian missionary enterprise in Persia, writes as follows: “Persia has even been described as the most hopeful among the fields of missionary labour in the East. While conscious of the valuable work that has been and is being done by the representatives of English, French, and American Mission societies in that country, by the spread of education, by the display of charity, by the free gift of medical assistance, by the force of example, and while in no way suggesting that these pious labours should be slackened, I am unable, from such knowledge as I possess, to participate in so sanguine a forecast of the future.” (p. 504.) “… In Persia, however, not the least of the obstacles with which Christian communities are confronted arise from their own sectarian differences, and the Musulmáns are perfectly entitled to scoff at those who invite them to enter a flock the different members of which love each other so bitterly. Protestants squabble with Roman Catholics, Presbyterians with Episcopalians, the Protestant Nestorians look with no very friendly eye upon the Nestorians proper, and these, again, are not on the most harmonious terms with the Chaldaeans, or Catholic Nestorians. The Armenians gaze askance upon the United (or Catholic) Armenians, and both unite in retarding the work of the Protestant missions. Finally, the hostility of the Jews may, as a rule, be reckoned upon. In the various countries of the East in which I have traveled, from Syria to Japan, I have been struck by the strange and, to my mind, sorrowful phenomenon, of missionary bands waging the noblest of warfares under the banner of the King of Peace with fratricidal weapons in their hands.” (Pp. 507–8.) “… If, then, the criterion of missionary enterprise in Persia be the number of converts it has made from Islám, I do not hesitate to say that the prodigious expenditure of money of honest effort, and of sacrificing toil that has been showered upon that country has met with a wholly inadequate return. Young Muḥammadans have sometimes been baptised by Christian missionaries. But this must not too readily be confounded with conversion, since the bulk of the newcomers relapse into the faith of their fathers and I question if, since the day when Henry Martyn set foot in S̱híráz up till the present moment, half a dozen Persian Muḥammadans have genuinely embraced the Christian creed. I have myself often enquired for, but have never seen, a converted Musulmán (I exclude, of course, those derelicts or orphans of Musulmán parents who are brought up from childhood in Christian schools). Nor am I surprised at even the most complete demonstration of failure. Putting aside the dogmatic assumptions of Christianity (e.g. the doctrine of the Trinity and the Divinity of Christ), which are so repugnant to the Muḥammadan conception of the unity of God, we cannot regard the reluctance of a Musulmán to desert his faith with much astonishment when we remember that the penalty for such an act is death. The chances of conversion are remote indeed so long as the body as well as the soul of the convert is thrown into the scales But personal apprehensions, though an important are not the deciding factor in the situation. It is against the impregnable rock-wall of Islám as a system embracing every sphere, and duty, and act of life, that the waves of missionary effort beat and buffet in vain. Marvellously adapted alike to the climate, character and occupations of those countries upon which it has laid its adamantine grip, Islám holds its votary in complete thrall from the cradle to the grave. To him, it is not only religion, it is government, philosophy, and science as well. The Muḥammadan conception is not so much that of a state church as, if the phrase may be permitted, of a church state. The undergirders with which society itself is warped round are not of civil, but of ecclesiastical, fabrication, and, wrapped in this superb, if paralysing creed, the Musulmán lives in contented surrender of all volition, deems it his highest duty to worship God and to compel, or, where impossible, to despise those who do not worship Him in the spirit, and then dies in sure and certain hope of Paradise. So long as this all-compelling, all-absorbing code of life holds an Eastern people in its embrace, determining every duty and regulating every act of existence, and finally meting out an assured salvation missionary treasure and missionary self-denial will largely be spent in vain. Indeed, an active propaganda is, in my judgment, the worst of policies that a Christian mission in a bigoted Musulmán country can adopt and the very tolerance with which I have credited the Persian government is in large measure due to the prudent abstention of the Christian missionaries from avowed proselytism.” (Pp. 508–9.) {language="en"}

[23667608] Gobineau, writing about the year 1865, gives the following testimony: “Thus Bábism has won a considerable influence on the mind of Persia, and spreading beyond the Persian frontier, has overflowed into the pachalick of Bag̱hdád and penetrated into India. Among its characteristics, one of the most striking is that, even during the life of the Báb, many of the new faith, many of its most convinced and devoted followers, have never known personally their prophet and do not seem to have attached great importance to the hearing of his instructions from his own lips. Nevertheless, they rendered him, completely and without reservation, the honors and the veneration to which, in their own eyes, he was certainly entitled.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 255.) {language="en"}

[23667609] “The Cause of the Báb is on the road to great achievements. We have now shown how there has taken place a religious movement which absorbs the deepest attention of Central Asia, that is to say, of Persia, several regions of India and a section of Asiatic Turkey; a religious movement, therefore, truly remarkable and worthy of being studied. Through it, we witness events, manifestations, catastrophes such that one could only imagine possible in remote ages when the great religions were born. I even confess that if I were to see appear in Europe a religion like unto Bábism, with advantages such as Bábism possesses, with complete faith, an undaunted enthusiasm, tried courage and proven devotion, winning the respect of the indifferent, frightening its adversaries and, moreover, a tireless proselytism constantly gaining adherents in every social class, — if I were to see such a phenomenon in Europe, I would not hesitate to predict that, within a given time, power and sovereignty would of necessity belong to a group so richly endowed.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 116, 293–294.)<br>“It seems certain that from the religious standpoint and especially from the moral one, Bábism marks an advance over the teachings of Islám; one may hold with M. Vambery (French Academy, March 12, 1892) that its leader has expressed doctrines worthy of the greatest thinkers…. In any case the growth of Bábism is an interesting chapter in the history of modern religions and civilization. And thus, after all is said, those who praise it are perhaps right; it may be that from Bábism will come the regeneration of the Persian peoples, even of the whole of Islám which is in real need of it. Unfortunately there is seldom a national regeneration without much shedding of blood.” (M. J. Balteau’s “Le Bábisme,” p. 28.)<br>“Now it appears to me that the history of the Bábí movement must be interesting in effort ways to others besides those who are directly engaged in the study of Persian. To the student of religious thought it will afford no little matter for reflection; for here he may contemplate such personalities as by lapse of time pass into heroes and demi-gods still unobscured by myth and fable he may examine by the light of concurrent and independent testimony one of those strange outbursts of enthusiasm, faith, fervent devotion, and indomitable heroism — or fanaticism, if you will — which we are accustomed to associate with the earlier history of the human race; he may witness in a word, the birth of a faith which may not impossibly win a place amidst the great religions of the world. To the ethnologist also it may yield food for thought as to the character of a people who, stigmatised as they often have been as selfish, mercenary, avaricious, egotistical, sordid, and cowardly, are yet capable of exhibiting under the influence of a strong religious impulse a degree of devotion, disinterestedness, generosity, unselfishness, nobility, and courage which may be paralleled in history, but can scarcely be surpassed. To the politician, too, the matter is not devoid of importance; for what changes may not be effected in a country now reckoned almost as a cypher in the balance of national forces by a religion capable of evoking so mighty a spirit? Let those who know what Muḥammad made the Arabs, consider well what the Báb may yet make the Persians.” (E. G. Browne’s introduction to “A Traveller’s Narrative,” pp. 8–9.)<br>“So here at Bahjí was I installed as a guest, in the very midst of all that Bábism accounts most noble and most holy; and here did I spend five most memorable days, during which I enjoyed unparalleled and unhoped-for opportunities of holding intercourse with those who are the very fountain-heads of that mighty and wondrous spirit which works with invisible but ever-increasing force for the transformation and quickening of a people who slumber in a sleep like unto death. It was in truth a strange and moving experience, but one whereof I despair of conveying any save the feeblest impression. I might, indeed, strive to describe in greater detail the faces and forms which surrounded me, the conversations to which I was privileged to listen, the solemn melodious reading of the sacred books, the general sense of harmony and content which pervaded the place, and the fragrant shady gardens whither in the afternoon we sometimes repaired; but all this was as nought in comparison with the spiritual atmosphere with which I was encompassed. Persian Muslims will tell you often that the Bábís bewitch or drug their guests so that these, impelled by a fascination which they cannot resist, become similarly affected with what the aforesaid Muslims regard as a strange and incomprehensible madness. Idle and absurd as this belief is, it yet rests on a basis of fact stronger than that which supports the greater part of what they allege concerning this people. The spirit which pervades the Bábís is such that it can hardly fail to affect most powerfully all subjected to its influence. It may appeal or attract: it cannot be ignored or disregarded. Let those who have not seen disbelieve me if they will; but, should that spirit once reveal itself to them, they will experience an emotion which they are not likely to forget.” (Ibid., pp. 38–9.)<br>“It will thus be seen that, in its external organisation, Bábism has undergone great and radical changes since it first appeared as a proselytising force half a century ago. These changes, however, have in no wise impaired, but appear, on the contrary, to have stimulated, its propaganda, which has advanced with a rapidity inexplicable to those who can only see therein a crude form of political or even of metaphysical fermentation. The lowest estimate places the present number of Bábís in Persia at half a million. I am disposed to think, from conversations with persons well qualified to judge, that the total is nearer one million. They are to be found in every walk of life, from the ministers and nobles of the Court to the scavenger or the groom, not the least arena of their activity being the Musulmán priesthood itself. It will have been noticed that the movement was initiated by siyyids, ḥájís, and mullás — i.e. persons who, either by descent, from pious inclination, or by profession, were intimately concerned with the Muḥammadan creed; and it is among even the professed votaries of the faith that they continue to make their converts. Many Bábís are well known to be such, but, as long as they walk circumspectly, are free from intrusion or persecution. In the poorer walks of life the fact is, as a rule, concealed for fear of giving an excuse for the superstitious rancour of superiors. Quite recently the Bábís have had great success in the camp of another enemy, having secured many proselytes among the Jewish populations of the Persian towns. I hear that during the past year they are reported to have made 150 Jewish converts in Ṭihrán, 100 in Hamadán, 50 in Kás̱hán, and 75 per cent of the Jews at Gulpáygán.” (Lord Curzon’s “Persia and the Persian Question,” vol. 1, pp. 499–500.)<br>“From that subtle race,” writes Dr. J. Estlin Carpenter, “issues the most remarkable movement which modern Muḥammadanism has produced…. Disciples gathered round him, and the movement was not checked by his arrest, his imprisonment for nearly six years and his final execution in 1850…. It, too, claims to be a universal teaching; it has already its noble army of martyrs and its holy hooks; has Persia, in the midst of her miseries, given birth to a religion which will go round the world?” (“Comparative Religion,” pp. 70, 71.)<br>“Once again,” writes Professor E. G. Browne, “in the world’s history has the East vindicated her claim to teach religion to the West, and to hold in the Spiritual World that preeminence which the Western nations hold in the Material.” (Introduction to M. H. Phelps’ “Life and Teachings of ‘Abbás Effendi,” p. 15.) {language="en"}

[23667610] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s title. {language="en"}

[23667611] “The Caliphate began with the election of Abú-Bakr in A.D. 632 and lasted until A.D. 1258, when Húlágú Ḵhán sacked Bag̱hdád and put Mu‘taṣim-Bi’lláh to death. For nearly three centuries after this catastrophe the title of Caliph was perpetuated in Egypt by descendants of the House of ‘Abbás who lived under the protection of its Mameluke rulers, until in A.D. 1517 Sulṭán Salím, the Osmanli, having conquered the Mameluke dynasty induced the helpless Caliph to transfer to him the title and insignia.” (P. M. Sykes’ “A History of Persia,” vol. 2, p. 25.) {language="en"}

