[23667438] The Imám Ḥusayn. {language="en"}

[23667439] The tenth of Muḥarram, the day on which the Imám Ḥusayn was martyred. {language="en"}

[23667440] “God is Most Great.” {language="en"}

[23667441] May 10, 1850 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667442] “When they would have bound him with his back towards the gun, he said: ‘Bind me, I pray you, with my face towards the gun, that I may see it fired.’ The gunners and those who stood by looking on were all astonished at his composure and cheerfulness, and indeed one who can be cheerful in such a plight must needs have great faith and fortitude.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” p. 117.) {language="en"}

[23667443] “When Áqá Ḵhán had verified the disappearance of the rebel, he gave a sigh of relief. Besides, he felt that to pursue the fugitives would involve some peril and that, therefore, it would be infinitely more practical, more beneficial, more profitable and less dangerous to torture the Bábís, or those presumed to be Bábís — provided that they were wealthy — who had remained in the city. He sought out the most prosperous, ordered their execution, and confiscated their possessions, avenging thus his outraged religion, a matter perhaps of little concern to him, and filling his coffers, which pleased him immensely.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 391.) {language="en"}

[23667444] About twenty-five miles. {language="en"}

[23667445] Chief of a ward or parish in a town; headman of a village. {language="en"}

[23667446] “The Nayrízís welcomed Siyyid Yaḥyá with the greatest enthusiasm. Barely two days after his arrival, a large number came to see him by night out of fear of the government, says the Fárs-Námih, and offered their services, for they hated their rulers. Others, mostly residents of the district of C̱hinár-Súḵhtih, were converted in great numbers. Their example was contagious and soon the Bábís could count, in their midst, the ṭullábs of C̱hinár-Súḵhtih who numbered about one hundred, their chief Ḥájí S̱hayḵh ‘Abdu’l-‘Alí, father of the wife of Siyyid Yaḥyá, the late Áḵhúnd Mullá ‘Abdu’l-Ḥusayn, an aged gentleman well versed in religious literature, Áḵhúnd Mullá Báqir, Pis̱h\-namáz of the district, Mullá ‘Alí Katib, another Mullá ‘Alí with his four brothers, and the kad-ḵhudá, and the Rís̱h\-Safíd, and other citizens from the quarter called ‘Bázár’, such as the late Mas̱hhadí Mírzá Ḥusayn called Quṭb, with all of his family and his relatives, Mírzá Abu’l-Qásim who was the nephew of the governor! Ḥájí Muḥammad-Taqí surnamed Ayyúb and his son-in-law Mírzá Ḥusayn and many others from the quarter of the Siyyid, and the son of Mírzá Nawrá, and Mírzá ‘Alí-Riḍá, son of Mírzá Ḥusayn, and the son of Ḥájí ‘Alí, etc., etc. All were converted, some at night in deadly fear, others openly and fearlessly.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 393.) {language="en"}

[23667447] About twenty-eight miles. {language="en"}

[23667448] May 27, 1850\. {language="en"}

[23667449] “He ascended the pulpit and cried out: ‘Am I not he whom you have always considered your shepherd and your guide? Have you not always depended on my teaching for the direction of your conscience in the path of salvation? Am I not he whose words of counsel you have always obeyed? What has happened that you should treat me as though I were your enemy and the enemy of your religion? What lawful deeds have I forbidden? What illicit action have I permitted? With what impiety can you charge me? Have I ever led you into error? And behold! That because I have told you the truth, because I have loyally sought to instruct you, I am oppressed and persecuted! My heart burns with love for you and you persecute me! Remember! Remember well, whosoever saddens me, saddens my ancestor Muḥammad, the glorious Prophet, and whosoever helps me, helps him also. In the name of all that is sacred to you let all those who love the Prophet follow me!’” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 395.) {language="en"}

[23667450] Chief of a ward or parish in a town; headman of a village. {language="en"}

[23667451] The Persian lambskin hat worn by government employees and civilians. {language="en"}

[23667452] Túmán: A sum of money equivalent to a dollar. {language="en"}

[23667453] “Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667454] The author of Násiḵhu’t-Taváríḵh affirms without the least sorrow that the imperial troops were poorly trained and not at all eager to fight, so, with no thought of attacking, they established a camp which they hastened to fortify immediately.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 401.) {language="en"}

[23667455] “God is the Most Great!” {language="en"}

[23667456] “Although the losses were almost even this time, the imperial troops were none-the-less frightened; things were dragging on and might moreover end in the general confusion of the Mussulmans, so they resolved to resort to deceit.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 403.) {language="en"}

[23667457] “God is the Most Great!” {language="en"}

[23667458] “He took hold of the green belt of Yaḥyá, symbol of his holy ancestry, tied it in a knot about his neck and began to drag him on the ground. Then came Ṣafar whose brother S̱ha‘bán had fallen during the war, then Áqá Ján, son of ‘Alí-Aṣg̱har Ḵhán, brother of Zaynu’l-‘Ábidín Ḵhán, and the Muḥammadans, aroused by the scene, stoned and beat to death the unfortunate man. They then severed the head, tore off the skin, stuffed it with straw and sent that trophy to S̱híráz!” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 406.) {language="en"}

[23667459] According to ‘Abdu’l-Bahá’s testimony, he had committed to memory no less than thirty thousand traditions. (Manuscript entitled “Bahá’í Martyrs”.) {language="en"}

[23667460] Bahá’u’lláh refers to him as “that unique and peerless figure of his age.” (The “Kitáb-i-Íqán,” p. 188.) The Báb, in the “Dalá’il-i-Sab‘ih,” refers to him in the following terms: ‘Behold again the number of the name of God (Siyyid Yaḥyá)! This man was living a holy, peaceful life in such a way that no one could deny his talents or his sanctity, all admired his greatness in the sciences and the heights he had attained in philosophy. Refer to the commentary of the Súratu’l-Kawṯhar (Qur’án: S. 108) and to the other treatises written for him, which prove how high a place he occupies in the sight of God!’” (“Le Livre des Sept Preuves,” translated by A. L. M. Nicolas, pp. 54–55.) {language="en"}

[23667461] “Siyyid Yaḥyá was strangled with his own girdle by one whose two brothers had been killed during the siege, and the other Bábís likewise died by the hands of the executioner. The heads of the victims were stuffed with straw, and bearing with them these grim trophies of their prowess, together with some forty or fifty Bábí women and one child of tender age as captives, the victorious army returned to S̱híráz. Their entry into that city was made the occasion of general rejoicing; the captives were paraded through the streets and bazaars and finally brought before Prince Fírúz Mírzá, who was feasting in a summer-house called Kuláh-i-Farangí. In his presence Mihr-‘Alí Ḵhán, Mírzá Na‘ím, and the other officers recounted the details of their victory, and received congratulations and marks of favour. The captive women were finally imprisoned in an old caravanserai outside the Iṣfahán gate. What treatment they experienced at the hands of their captors is left to our conjecture.” (“A Traveller’s Narrative,” Note H, p. 190.) “This day was a fete day, so an eye witness tells us. The inhabitants were scattered about through the countryside, bringing with them their food and many among them drinking, on the sly, whole bottles of wine. The air was filled with musical strains, the songs of musicians, the screaming and laughter of the lewd women. The bazaars were adorned with flags joy was general. Suddenly there was absolute silence. They saw coming thirty-two camels, each carrying an unfortunate prisoner, a woman or a child, bound and thrown crosswise over the saddle like a bundle. All around them were soldiers carrying long lances and upon each lance was impaled the head of a Bábí who had been slain at Nayríz. The hideousness of the sight deeply affected the holiday population of S̱híráz and they returned, saddened, to their dwellings. “The horrible caravan passed through the bazaars and continued to the palace of the governor. This personage was in his garden where he had gathered in his kiosk (called Kuláh-i-Farangí) the rich, the eminent citizens of S̱híráz. The music ceased, the dancing stopped and Muḥammad-‘Alí-Ḵhán as well as Mírzá Na‘ím, two small tribal chiefs who had taken part in the campaign, came to tell of their brave deeds and to name one by one the prisoners.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 407.) {language="en"}

[23667462] “It would seem, alas, that all this bloodshed would have been sufficient to appease the hatred and the lust of the Muḥammadans. Not at all! Mírzá Zaynu’l-‘Ábidín Ḵhán, finding himself threatened with a desire for revenge on those he had betrayed and vanquished, gave neither truce nor rest to the surviving ones of the sect. His hatred knew no bounds and it was to last as long as he lived. It was actually the very poor that had been sent to S̱híráz, the rich had been kept back. Zaynu’l-‘Ábidín Ḵhán had entrusted them to a guard who was ordered to walk them through the city beating them as they went. The people of Nayríz were greatly entertained that time. They hung the Bábí’s by four nails and everyone came to gloat over their anguish. They placed burning weeds under the nails of these unfortunate martyrs, they branded them with hot irons, they deprived them of bread and water, they cut holes through their noses, and running through them a cord they led them as one would a bear!” (Ibid., p. 408.) {language="en"}

[23667463] “Áqá Siyyid Ja‘far-i-Yazdí saw the executioners burn his turban and then they took him from door to door making him beg for money.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 408.) {language="en"}

[23667464] “Áqá Siyyid Abú-Ṭálib, who was very wealthy, was bound with chains and sent by the governor of Nayríz to Ma‘dan, and there poisoned by Ḥájí Mírzá Náṣir, the same man who had ordered the Báb to kiss the hand of S̱hayḵh Abú-Turáb. Two Bábí women, rather than be taken prisoners, threw themselves in a well and perished. Some Bábí’s, eager to see Mírzá Zaynu’l-‘Ábidín Ḵhán punished, started for Ṭihrán to protest to his Majesty against the atrocities which had been committed. They were but two or three stations away from the capital and, after the fatigue of the journey, were enjoying a little rest, when a caravan of S̱hírází people went by and recognized them. They were all arrested except Zaynu’l-‘Ábidín who succeeded in reaching Ṭihrán. The others were taken to S̱híráz where the Prince immediately ordered them executed, and so these men, Karbilá’í Abu’l-Ḥasan, a dealer in crockery, Áqá S̱hayḵh Hádí, uncle of the wife of Vaḥíd, Mírzá ‘Alí and Abu’l-Qásim-ibn-i-Ḥájí-Zayná, Akbar-ibn-i-‘Ábid, Mírzá Ḥasan and his brother Mírzá Bábá all died for their faith at this time. (Ibid., pp. 408–409.) {language="en"}

[23667465] “It was only too well known that Bábí’s were to be found everywhere. Persia was full of them and, if the minds concerned about transcendental questions, if the philosophers in search of new formulas, if the bruised souls shocked by the injustices and weaknesses of the present day — had given themselves up eagerly to the thought and to the promises of a new and more satisfactory world order, one could properly think that the turbulent imaginations eager for action, even at the price of failure, the brave and militant hearts, and finally the daring and ambitious would easily be tempted to throw themselves in with an army which revealed itself so well supplied with soldiers fit to constitute dauntless battalions.<br>“Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán, cursing the laxity with which his predecessor Ḥájí Mírzá Áqásí had allowed so great a peril to grow, realized that this weak policy should not continue and decided to destroy the evil to its very roots. He became convinced that the main cause was the Báb himself, father of all the doctrines which were arousing the people, and he decided to remove that cause.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 210–11.) {language="en"}

[23667466] “In the meantime, Ḥájí Mírzá Taqí resolved to strike at the very head of this monster of Bábism and he imagined that, after such a blow which would definitely remove the instigator of that agitation and silence his appeal, the old order would be restored. Nevertheless, strange phenomenon in an Asiatic government, and especially in a statesmen like Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán who could indulge in excessive severity without scruple, this minister did not order the death of the reformer! He thought that the most effective way to destroy him was to ruin him morally; to bring him out of his retreat in C̱hihríq where a halo of suffering, holiness, science and eloquence made him radiate like a sun; to show him to the people just as he was — that is to say, just as he thought he was — was the best way to render him harmless by destroying his prestige.<br>“He was picturing him as a vulgar charlatan, a weak dreamer who did not have courage enough to conceive, still less to direct the daring enterprises of his three apostles, or even to take part in them. Such a man, taken to Ṭihrán and brought face to face with the most subtle dialecticians of Islám, could not but surrender shamefully. His influence would vanish the more rapidly than if while destroying his body, one allowed to linger in the minds of the people the phantom of a superiority which death would have consecrated. It was therefore decided to arrest him and bring him to Ṭihrán and, on the way, to exhibit him publicly in chains and humiliated; to make him debate everywhere with the Mullás, silencing him whenever he would become too audacious; briefly, to engage him in a series of unequal encounters in which he would inevitably meet defeat, as he would have been previously demoralized and heartbroken. It was a lion that they were eager to unnerve, hold in chains and strip of claws and teeth, then turn him over to the dogs to show how easily they could overpower him. Once defeated, his ultimate fate was of little importance.<br>“This plan was not devoid of sense, but it rested upon premises which were far from proven. It was not enough to imagine that the Báb was without courage and firmness, it was necessary that he be really so. But his conduct in the fort of C̱hihríq gave no such evidence. He prayed and worked unceasingly. His meekness was unfailing. Those who came near him felt in spite of themselves the fascinating influence of his personality, of his manner and of his speech. His guards were not free from that weakness. He (the Báb) felt that his death was near and he would frequently refer to it as to a thought that was not only familiar but even pleasant. Suppose, for a moment, that thus exhibited throughout Persia he would still remain undaunted? Suppose he would display neither arrogance nor fear but would rise far above his misfortune? Suppose that he succeeded in throwing into confusion the learned, subtle, and eloquent doctors arraigned against him? Suppose he would remain more than ever the Báb for his old followers and become so for the indifferent and even for his enemies? It was risking much in order to gain much, without doubt, but also perhaps to lose much and, after having weighed the matter with care, they dared not take the chance.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 211–213.) {language="en"}

[23667467] “The prime minister, having summoned Sulaymán Ḵhán, the Afs̱hár, asked him to carry to Tabríz, to the Prince Ḥamzih Mírzá, governor of Áḏhirbáyján, the order to take the Báb out of the fort of C̱hihríq and to imprison him in the citadel of Tabríz where he would later be apprised of his fate.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 213.) {language="en"}

[23667468] June 12-July 11, 1850 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667469] According to “A Traveller’s Narrative” (p. 42), the Báb had produced no less than three hundred and sixty derivatives from the word “Bahá.” {language="en"}

[23667470] Title by which Bahá’u’lláh was designated in those days. {language="en"}

[23667471] “The end of the Báb’s earthly Manifestation is now close upon us. He knew it himself before the event, and was not displeased at the presentiment. He had already ‘set his house in order,’ as regards the spiritual affairs of the Bábí community, which he had, if I mistake not, confided to the intuitive wisdom of Bahá’u’lláh…. It is impossible not to feel that this is far more probable than the view which makes Ṣubḥ-i-Azal the custodian of the sacred writings and the arranger of a resting-place for the sacred remains. I much fear that the Azalí’s have manipulated tradition in the interest of their party.” (Dr. T. K. Cheyne’s “The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” pp. 65–6.) {language="en"}

[23667472] “Order,” “command,” “royal decree.” {language="en"}

[23667473] Persecutors of the descendants of Muḥammad. {language="en"}

[23667474] “It is no doubt a singular coincidence that both ‘Alí-Muḥammad and Jesus Christ are reported to have addressed these words to a disciple: ‘To-day thou shalt be with me in Paradise.’” (Dr. T. K. Cheyne’s “The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” p. 185.) {language="en"}

[23667475] See Glossary. {language="en"}

[23667476] “On the following day, early in the morning, the people of Ḥamzih Mírzá, having opened the doors of the prison, brought out the Báb and his disciples. They made sure that the irons which they had around their necks and on their wrists were secure; they tied to the iron collar of each one a long cord the end of which was held by a farrás̱h. Then, so that everyone could see them well and recognize them, they walked them about the town, through the streets and the bazaars, overwhelming them with blows and insults. The crowd filled the streets and the people climbed upon each others’ shoulders better to see this man who was so much talked about. The Bábí’s, scattered in all directions, were trying to arouse among some of the onlookers a little pity or some feeling of sympathy which might have helped them to save their Master. The indifferent ones, the philosophers, the S̱hayḵhís, the Ṣúfís, turned away from the sight with disgust and returned to their houses, or on the contrary waited for the Báb at a street corner and simply watched him with silent curiosity. The tattered crowd, restless and excitable, flung insulting words at the three martyrs, but they were all ready to change their minds with any sudden change of circumstances.<br>“Finally, the victorious Muḥammadans pursued the prisoners with insults, tried to break through the guard in order to strike them in the face or on the head and when they succeeded, or when a missile thrown by some child would strike the Báb or one of his companions in the face, the guard and the crowd would burst into laughter.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 220.) {language="en"}

[23667477] “Proof of the devotion and steadfastness of this noble man is afforded by a letter in his own blessed writing which was in the possession of his brother Mullá ‘Abdu’lláh, who still lives in Tabríz. This letter he wrote from the prison, three days or two days before his martyrdom, in reply to his brother, who had written to him counselling him to turn aside from his devotion and thraldom; and therein he makes his apology. And since the martyr was the younger of the two brethren, therefore he adopts a respectful tone in his letter. The text of this letter of reply is as follows: ‘He is the Compassionate. O my Qiblih! Thanks be to God, I have no fault to find with my circumstances, and “to every travail rest succeeds.” As to what you wrote, that this matter hath no end, what matter, then, hath an end? We, at least, have no discontent therein; being, indeed, unable sufficiently to express our gratitude for this blessing. At most we can but be slain for God’s sake, and, oh, what happiness were this! The Lord’s will must be accomplished through His servants, neither can prudence avert predestined fate. What God wills comes to pass: there is no strength save in God. O my Qiblih! The end of the life of the world is death: “every soul shall taste of death.” If the appointed destiny which the Lord (mighty and glorious is He) hath decreed should overtake me, then God is the guardian of my family, and thou art my trustee; act in such wise as accords with God’s good pleasure. Forgive any failure in the respect or duty owed to an elder brother of which I may have been guilty, seek pardon for me from all those of my household, and commend me to God. God is my portion, and how good is He as a guardian!’” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 301–3.) {language="en"}

[23667478] “When the condemned are shot in Persia, they are bound to a post looking away from the spectators so that they are not able to see the signals for execution given by the officer.” (Journal Asiatique, 1866, tome 7, p. 377.) {language="en"}

[23667479] “An intense clamor arose from the crowd at this moment as the onlookers saw the Báb freed from his bonds advancing towards them. Amazing to believe, the bullets had not struck the condemned but, on the contrary, had broken his bonds and he was delivered. It was a real miracle and God alone knows what would have happened without the fidelity and calm of the Christian regiment on this occurrence. The soldiers in order to quiet the excitement of the crowd which, being extremely agitated, was ready to believe the claims of a religion which thus demonstrated its truth, showed the cords broken by the bullets, implying that no miracle had really taken place. At the same time, they seized the Báb and tied him again to the fatal post. This time the execution was effective. Muḥammadan justice and ecclesiastical law had asserted themselves. But the crowd, vividly impressed by the spectacle they had witnessed, dispersed slowly, hardly convinced that the Báb was a criminal. After all his crime was only a crime for the legalists and the world is indulgent toward crimes which it does not understand.” (M.C. Huart’s “La Religion du Báb,” pp. 3–4.)<br>“An extraordinary thing happened, unique in the annals of the history of humanity: the bullets cut the cords that held the Báb and he fell on his feet without a scratch.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 375.)<br>“By a strange coincidence, the bullet only touched the cords which bound the Báb, they were broken and he felt himself free. Uproar and shouts arose on all sides, no one understanding at first what it was all about.” (Ibid., p. 379.) {language="en"}

[23667480] According to “A Traveller’s Narrative” (p. 45), “the breasts \[of the victims\] were riddled and their limbs were completely dissected, except their faces, which were but little marred.” {language="en"}

[23667481] “Praise be to God who manifested the Point \[the Báb\] and caused to proceed therefrom the knowledge of all that was and shall be…. He is that Point which God hath made to be an Ocean of light unto the faithful among His servants, and a Ball of Fire unto the deniers among His creatures and the impious among His people.” (Bahá’u’lláh, the “Is̱hráqát,” p. 3.) “In His interpretation of the letter ‘Há,’ He craved martyrdom, saying: ‘Methinks I heard a voice calling in My inmost being: “Do Thou sacrifice the thing which Thou lovest most in the path of God, even as Ḥusayn, peace be upon him, hath offered up his life for My sake.” And were I not regardful of this inevitable mystery, by Him in whose hand is My soul, even if all the kings of the earth were to be leagued together, they would be powerless to take from Me a single letter; how much less can such servants as these, who are worthy of no attention, and who verily are of the outcast? that all may know the degree of My patience, My resignation and self-sacrifice in the path of God.’” (Idem, the “Kitáb-i-Íqán,” p. 195.) “The Báb, the Lord most high, may the life of all be a sacrifice unto Him, hath specifically revealed an Epistle unto the ‘ulamás of every city, wherein He hath fully set forth the character of the denial and repudiation of each of them. Wherefore, take ye good heed, ye who are men of insight!” (Ibid., p. 193.) “This illustrious Soul arose with such power that He shook the supports of the religion, of the morals, the conditions, the habits and the customs of Persia, and instituted new rules, new laws, and a new religion. Though the great personages of the State, nearly all the clergy, and the public men, arose to destroy and annihilate Him, He alone withstood them, and moved the whole of Persia…. He imparted Divine education to an unenlightened multitude and produced marvellous results on the thoughts, morals, customs, and conditions of the Persians.” (‘Abdu’l-Bahá, “Some Answered Questions,” pp. 30–31.) “Christians believe that if Jesus Christ had wished to come down from the cross he could have done so easily; he died of his own free will because it was written that he should and in order that the prophecies might be fulfilled. The same is true of the Báb, so the Bábí’s say, who, in this way, gave a clear sanction to his teachings. He likewise died voluntarily because his death was to be the salvation of humanity. Who will ever tell us the words that the Báb uttered in the midst of the unprecedented turmoil which broke out as he ascended? Who will ever know the memories which stirred his noble soul? Who will reveal to us the secret of that death…. The sight of the baseness, the vices, the deceptions of that clergy shocked his pure and sincere soul: he felt the need of a thorough reform in public morals and he undoubtedly hesitated more than once, at the thought of a revolution, which seemed unavoidable, to free the bodies as well as the minds from the yoke of brutishness and violence which weighed upon all Persia for the selfish benefit of a minority … of pleasure lovers, and to the greatest shame of the true religion of the Prophet. He must have been much perplexed, deeply anxious, and he stood in need of the triple shield of which Horace speaks, to throw himself headlong into that ocean of superstition and hatred which was fatally to engulf him. His life is one of the most magnificent examples of courage which it has been the privilege of mankind to behold, and it is also an admirable proof of the love which our hero felt for his fellow countrymen. He sacrificed himself for humanity, for it he gave his body and his soul, for it he endured privations, insults, torture and martyrdom. He sealed, with his very lifeblood, the covenant of universal brotherhood. Like Jesus he paid with his life for the proclamation of a reign of concord, equity and brotherly love. More than anyone he knew what dreadful dangers he was heaping upon himself. He had been able to see personally the degree of exasperation that a fanaticism, shrewdly aroused, could reach; but all these considerations could not weaken his resolve. Fear had no hold upon his soul and, perfectly calm, never looking back, in full possession of all his powers, he walked into the furnace.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad, dit le Báb,” pp. 203–204, 376.)<br>“The head of the new religion was dead and, according to the provisions of the prime minister, the minds of the people would now be at peace and there was no room for further anxiety, at least from that source. But such political wisdom was baffled and, instead of appeasing the flames, it had fanned them into greater violence.”<br>“We shall see shortly, when I shall examine the religious dogmas preached by the Báb, that the perpetuity of the sect did not in the least depend upon his physical presence; all could proceed and grow without him. If the premier had been aware of this fundamental trait of the hostile religion, it is not likely that he would have been so eager to do away with a man whose existence, after all, would not have had any more significance than his death.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 224–225.) Such a prophet,” writes the Rev. Dr. T. K.Cheyne, “was the Báb; we call him ‘prophet’ for want of a better name, ‘yea, I say unto you, a prophet and more than a prophet.’ His combination of mildness and power is so rare that we have to place him in a line with super-normal men…. We learn that at great points in his career, after he had been in an ecstasy, such radiance of might and majesty streamed from his countenance that none could bear to look upon the effulgence of his glory and beauty. Nor was it an uncommon occurrence for unbelievers involuntarily to bow down in lowly obeisance on beholding His Holiness — while the inmates of the castle though for the most part Christians and Sunnís, reverently prostrated themselves whenever they saw the visage of His Holiness. Such transfiguration is well known to the saints. It was regarded as the affixing of the heavenly seal to the reality and completeness of \[the\] Báb’s detachment.” (“The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” pp. 8–9.) “Who can fail to be attracted by the gentle spirit of Mírzá ‘Alí-Muḥammad? His sorrowful and persecuted life; his purity of conduct, and youth; his courage and uncomplaining patience under misfortune; his complete self-negation; the dim ideal of a better state of things which can be discerned through the obscure and mystic utterances of the Bayán; but most of all his tragic death, all serve to enlist our sympathies on behalf of the young Prophet of S̱híráz. The irresistible charm which won him such devotion during his life still lives on, and still continues to influence the minds of the Persian people.” (E. G. Browne’s art. “The Bábí’s of Persia,” Journal of J. R. A. S., 1889, p. 933.) “Few believe that by these sanguinary measures the doctrines of \[the\] Báb will cease from propagation. There is a spirit of change abroad among the Persians, which will preserve his system from extinction; besides which, his doctrines are of an attractive nature to Persians. Though now subdued, and obliged to lurk concealed in towns, it is conjectured that the creed of \[the\] Báb, far from diminishing, is daily spreading.” Lady Sheil’s “Glimpses of Life and Manners in Persia,” p. 181.) “The story of the Báb, as Mírzá ‘Alí-Muḥammad called himself, was the story of spiritual heroism unsurpassed in Svabhava’s experience; and his own adventurous soul was fired by it. That a youth of no social influence and no education should, by the simple power of insight, be able to pierce into the heart of things and see the real truth, and then hold on to it with such firmness of conviction and present it with such suasion that he was able to convince men that he was the Messiah and get them to follow him to death itself, was one of those splendid facts in human history that Svabhava loved to meditate on… The Báb’s passionate sincerity could not be doubted, for he had given his life for his faith. And that there must be something in his message that appealed to men and satisfied their souls was witnessed to by the fact that thousands gave their lives in his cause and millions now follow him. If a young man could, in only six years of ministry, by the sincerity of his purpose and the attraction of his personality, so inspire rich and poor, cultured and illiterate, alike, with belief in himself and his doctrines that they would remain staunch though hunted down and without trial sentenced to death, sawn asunder, strangled, shot, blown from guns; and if men of high position and culture in Persia, Turkey and Egypt in numbers to this day adhere to his doctrines, his life must be one of those events in the last hundred years which is really worth study.” (Sir Francis Younghusband’s “The Gleam,” pp. 183–4.) “Thus, in only his thirtieth year, in the year 1850, ended the heroic career of a true God-man. Of the sincerity of his conviction that he was God-appointed, the manner of his death is the amplest possible proof. In the belief that he would thereby save others from the error of their present beliefs he willingly sacrificed his life. And of his power of attaching men to him the passionate devotion of hundreds and even thousands of men who gave their lives in his cause is convincing testimony.” (Ibid., p. 210.) “The Báb was dead, but not Bábism. He was not the first, and still less the last, of a long line of martyrs who have testified that even in a country gangrened with corruption and atrophied with indifferentism like Persia, the soul of a nation survives, inarticulate perhaps, and in a way helpless, but still capable of sudden spasms of vitality.” (Valentine Chirol’s “The Middle Eastern Question,” p. 120.) {language="en"}

[23667482] July 9, 1850 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667483] “‘The Emperor of Russia,’ he \[Ḥájí Mírzá Jání\] says, ‘sent to the Russian consul at Tabríz, bidding him fully investigate and report the circumstances of His Holiness the Báb. As Soon as this news arrived, they, i.e. the Persian authorities, put the Báb to death. The Russian consul summoned Áqá Siyyid Muḥammad-Ḥusayn, the Báb’s amanuensis, who was imprisoned at Tabríz, into his presence, and enquired concerning the signs and circumstances of His Holiness. Áqá Siyyid Ḥusayn, because there were Musulmáns present, dared not speak plainly about his Master, but managed by means of hints to communicate sundry matters, and also gave him \[the Russian consul\] certain of the Báb’s writings.’ That this statement is, in part at least, true is proved by the testimony of Dorn, who, in describing a M.S. of one of the Báb’s ‘Commentaries on the Names of God’ (which he calls ‘Qur’án og Bábís’) says, on p. 248 of vol. 8 of the Bulletin de l’Academie Imperiale des Sciences de St. Petersbourg, that it was ‘received directly from the Báb’s own secretary, who, during his imprisonment at Tabríz, placed it in European hands.’” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 395–6.) {language="en"}

[23667484] “Mayor.” {language="en"}

[23667485] “Following an immemorial custom of the Orient, usage exemplified at the siege of Beṯhulie as well as at the tomb of our Lord, the sentinel is a soldier who sleeps, to his heart’s content, at the post which he is expected to guard.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 166.) “We have been able to see throughout this history what the Persian guards are; their functions consist principally in sleeping by the trust that they are given to watch over.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 378.) {language="en"}

[23667486] “M. de Gobineau, in agreement with the authors of the Násiḵhu’t-Taváríḵh, of Rawḍatu’ṣ-Ṣafá, of Mir’átu’l-Buldán, in a word with all the official historians, relates that after the execution the body of the Báb was thrown in a moat of the city and devoured by dogs. In reality it was not so, and we shall see why this news had been spread by the authorities of Tabríz (little eager to draw upon themselves a rebuke of the government for a favor dearly sold) and by the Bábí’s, desirous to prevent any further investigation by the police. The most reliable testimony of the actual witnesses of the drama or of its actors do not leave me any doubt that the body of Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad was carried away by pious hands and, at last, after various incidents which I shall narrate, received a burial worthy of him.” (Ibid., p. 377.) {language="en"}

[23667487] “Ṭihrán is thus endowed in respect of the mausoleum and sanctuary of S̱háh ‘Abdu’l-‘Aẓím. Reposing beneath a golden-plated dome, whose scintillations I had seen from afar while riding towards the city, the remains of this holy individual are said to attract an annual visitation of 300 thousand persons. I find that most writers discreetly veil their ignorance of the identity of the saint by describing him as ‘a holy Musulmán, whose shrine is much frequented by the pious Ṭihránís. It appears, however, that long before the advent of Islám this had been a sacred spot, as the sepulchre of a lady of great sanctity, in which connection it may be noted that the shrine is still largely patronised by women. Here, after the Musulmán conquest, was interred Imám-Zádih Ḥamzih, the son of the seventh Imám, Músá-Káẓim; and here, flying from the Ḵhalíf Mutavakkil, came a holy personage named Abu’l-Qásim ‘Abdu’l-‘Aẓím, who lived in concealment at Rayy till his death in about 861 A.D. (This is the account given by the Persian Kitáb-i-Majlisí, quoting S̱hayḵh Najás̱hí, quoting Barkí.) Subsequently his fame obscured that of his more illustrious predecessor. Successive sovereigns, particularly those of the reigning dynasty, have extended and beautified the cluster of buildings raised above his grave, the ever-swelling popularity of which has caused a considerable village to spring up around the hallowed site. The mosque is situated in the plain, about six miles to the south-southeast of the capital, just beyond the ruins of Rayy, and at the extremity of the mountain-spur that encloses the Ṭihrán plain the southeast.” (Lord Curzon’s “Persia and the Persian Question,” pp. 345–7.) {language="en"}

[23667488] A local shrine in Ṭihrán. {language="en"}

[23667489] “It is true,” writes Lord Curzon, “that his \[Náṣiri’d-Dín S̱háh’s\] reign has been disfigured by one or two acts of regrettable violence; worst among which was the murder of his first Prime Minister, Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán, the Amír-Niẓám…. The brother-in-law of the S̱háh, and the first subject in the kingdom, he owed the vindictiveness of court intrigue and to the maliciously excited jealously of his youthful sovereign, a disgrace which his enemies were not satisfied until they had fulfilled by the death of their fallen, but still formidable victim.” (“Persia and the Persian Question,” vol. 1, p. 402.) {language="en"}

[23667490] “Every one knew that the Bábís had foretold the death of the prime minister and predicted the manner of his going. It happened precisely, it is said, as the martyrs of Zanján, Mírzá Riḍá, Ḥájí Muḥammad-‘Alí and Ḥájí Muḥsin had announced. Fallen into disgrace and pursued by the royal hatred, his veins were slashed open in the village of Fín, near Kás̱hán, as the veins of his victims had been slashed. His successor was Mírzá Áqá Ḵhán-i-Núrí of a noble tribe of Mázindarán, and erstwhile minister of war. This new official took the title of Ṣadr-i-A‘ẓam which is the privilege of the grand viziers of the Ottoman Empire. This occurred in 1852\. (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 230.) {language="en"}

[23667491] Capital of the district of Ḵhamsih. Zanján is the capital of the district of Ḵhamsih. “Ḵhamsih is a small province to the east of Kaflán-Kúh or Mountain of the Tiger, between ‘Iráq and Áḏhirbáyján. Its capital, Zanján, is a beautiful city surrounded by an embattled wall fortified with towers like all Persian cities. The inhabitants are of the Turkish race and the Persian language is seldom spoken, unless it be by government employees. The surrounding country is studded with villages which are fairly prosperous. Powerful tribes visit them, especially in the winter and spring.” (Ibid., p. 191.) {language="en"}

[23667492] “Now in these years \[A.H. 1266 and 1267\] throughout all Persia fire fell on the households of the Bábí’s, and each one of them, in whatever hamlet he might be, was, on the slightest suspicion arising, put to the sword. More than four thousand souls were slain, and a great multitude of women and children, left without protector or helper, distracted and confounded, were trodden down and destroyed.” (“A Traveller’s Narrative,” pp. 47–8.) {language="en"}

[23667493] “There lived in that city a mujtahid called Mullá Muḥammad-‘Alíy-i-Zanjání. He was a native of Mázindarán and studied under a celebrated master. Dignified with the title of S̱harífu’l-‘Ulamá’, Muḥammad-‘Alí had concentrated his attention on dogmatic theology and jurisprudence, and had become famous. The Muḥammadans affirm that, in his function as mujtahid, he showed himself restless and turbulent. No question ever seemed to him either sufficiently studied or properly solved. His repeated fatvás disconcerted the conscience and confused the practices of the faithful. Eager for change, he was neither tolerant in discussion nor moderate in debate. Sometimes he would unduly prolong the fast of Ramaḍán for reasons which no one had advanced before; sometimes he would alter the ritual of prayer in quite a novel way. He became obnoxious to the peaceful and odious to the traditionalists. But it is also admitted that he counted many followers who considered him a saint, prized his zeal, and put their faith in him. An impartial judge could recognize in him one of the Muḥammadans who are only so in appearance, but urged on by a living faith and an abundant religious zeal for which they are eager to find a scope. His misfortune was that he found, or thought he found, a natural use for his powers in the overthrow of traditions whose minor significance did not justify such a disturbance.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 191–192.) {language="en"}

[23667494] 1812–13 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667495] “Among the ‘Ulamás of the city was a man called Áḵhúnd Mullá ‘Abdu’r-Raḥím renowned for his piety. He had a son who lived in Najaf and at Karbilá where he attended the lectures of the celebrated S̱harífu’l-‘Ulamáy-i-Mázindarání. This young man was of a restless nature and rather impatient with the narrowness of S̱hí‘ism.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 332.) {language="en"}

[23667496] “On his way back from the Holy Land he stopped at Hamadán where the citizens welcomed him cordially and entreated him to remain.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 336.) {language="en"}

[23667497] “All the ‘Ulamás of the city called on him and left concerned over the few words which he had spoken and which revealed quite a novel turn of mind. Indeed the attitude of the newcomer very quickly proved to these pious men that their conjectures were well founded.” (Ibid.) {language="en"}

[23667498] “There was a caravansary of the days of S̱háh ‘Abbás which had gradually become a ṣíg̱hih-ḵhánih: in order to prevent a breach of the S̱hí‘ite law a certain Mullá Dúst-Muḥammad who made his residence there, would bless the transitory union between the male visitors to the place and the inmates. Ḥujjatu’l-Islám, such was the title which our hero had assumed, ordered the institution to be closed, gave in marriage the greater number of these women and secured employment for the others in respectable families. He also caused a wine dealer to be whipped and his house to be torn down.” (Ibid., pp. 332–333.) {language="en"}

[23667499] “But this was the limit of his activity. Always troubled with the problems raised by a religion founded upon ḥadíṯh which were frequently contradictory, he perplexed the conscience of the faithful by peculiar fatvás which upset old traditions. Thus he restored the ḥadíṯh according to which Muḥammad would have said: The month of Ramaḍán is always full.’ Without investigating the origin of that tradition, without enquiring whether those who had related it were worthy of faith, he commanded that it should be literally obeyed, thus inducing his hearers to fast on the day of Fitr which is held to be a grievous sin. He also permitted that prostrations be made at prayer time by resting the head upon a crystal stone. All these innovations won for him a large number of partisans who admired his science and his activity; but they displeased the official clergy whose hatred, further augmented by anxiety, soon knew no bounds.” (Ibid., p. 333.) {language="en"}

[23667500] “Ḥujjat came and, by his courtesy and his captivating personality, soon won over all those who came in contact with him, even His Majesty. One day, so the story goes, he was in the palace of the S̱háh with several of his colleagues, when one of them, an ‘Ulamá of Kás̱hán, brought out a document and besought the king to sign it. It was a royal decree granting certain stipends. Ḥujjat rose up and bitterly denounced a clergy who begged pensions from the government. He had recourse to the ḥadíṯh and to the Qur’án to show how shameful was such a practice which had originated with the Baní-Umayyih. His colleagues were beside themselves with anger, but the S̱háh, pleased with such frankness, presented our hero with a staff and a ring and authorized him to return to Zanján.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 373–374.) {language="en"}

[23667501] “The inhabitants of Zanján came in crowds to meet him and offered sacrifices of oxen, chickens and sheep. Twelve children, each twelve years of age, with red kerchiefs about their necks to show their readiness to sacrifice their all, were in the center of the cortège. It proved a triumphal entry.” (Ibid., p. 334.) {language="en"}

[23667502] “He transformed his disciples into models of virtue and temperance; henceforth the men quenched their thirst at the fountains of spiritual life. They fasted during three months, lengthened their prayers by adding to them daily the invocation of Ja‘far-i-Ṭayyár, performing once a day their ablutions with the water of the Qur (legal measure of purity) and finally on Fridays they crowded the Mosques.” (Ibid., p. 334.) {language="en"}

[23667503] “Finally, he uttered in a clear voice the Friday prayer which must be said instead of the habitual daily one said when the Imám comes. He then expounded several sayings of the Báb and concluded thus: ‘The goal for which the world has been striving is now here, free from veils and obstacles. The sun of Truth has risen and the lights of imagination and imitation have been extinguished. Fix your eyes upon the Báb, not upon me, the least of his slaves. My wisdom compared to his is as an unlighted candle to the sun at midday. Know God by God and the sun by its rays. So, today has appeared the Ṣáḥibu’z-Zamán. The Sulṭán of Possibilities is living.’ Needless to say, these words made a deep impression upon the audience. Nearly all accepted this message and conversed among themselves regarding the true nature of the Báb.” (Ibid., p. 335.) {language="en"}

[23667504] “The conversion of Mullá Muḥammad-‘Alí and his numerous partisans had in fact exhausted the patience of the Imám-Jum‘ih and of S̱hayḵhu’l-Islám. They wrote indignant letters to His Majesty who in reply gave orders for the arrest of the offender.” (Ibid., p. 336.) {language="en"}

[23667505] “He was in Ṭihrán until the day when, after the death of Muḥammad S̱háh, Náṣiri’d-Dín Mírzá now Náṣiri’d-Dín S̱háh, appointed as governor of Zanján, one of his uncles, Amír Arslán Ḵhán Majdu’d-Dawlih, who was Is̱híq Ág̱hásí of the palace.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 337.) {language="en"}

[23667506] “He made a triumphant entry into his native city. Now that he was a Bábí, to his old friends were added the believers in the new doctrine. A large number of men, rich and respected, soldiers, merchants, even Mullás came to meet him, at a distance of one or two stations away, and conducted him home, not as an exile who returns, not as a suppliant who asks only rest, not even as a rival strong enough to demand respect, but he entered as a master.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 193.)<br>“The author of ‘Násiḵhu’t-Taváríḵh’ himself acknowledged that a goodly number of citizens of Zanján, and among them high officials, traveled the distance of two stations to meet him. He was received like a conqueror and many heads of sheep were sacrificed in his honor. None of his opponents dared ask him why he had left Ṭihrán and had returned to Zanján; but Islám was severely tried as the Zanjánís did not hesitate to preach throughout the city the new doctrine. The Muḥammadan writer points out that all the Zanjánís were simple-minded and so fell easily into the snare; but contradicting himself he declares that only the knaves, greedy for worldly possessions, and the impious ones gathered round the new leader. However they were quite numerous and, according to his story, about fifteen thousand, which seems rather an exaggerated estimate.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 337–338.) {language="en"}

[23667507] “Majdu’d-Dawlih, governor of the city, a cruel, heartless and severe man, enraged at the news of the return of so troublesome a person as Ḥujjat, ordered that Muḥammad Big be whipped and that the tongue of Karbilá’í Valí be cut out.” (Ibid., p. 337.) {language="en"}

[23667508] “Athlete,” “champion.” Term applied to brave and muscular men. {language="en"}

[23667509] “O Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667510] “At the spectacle, the Muḥammadans took flight and the wounded man was cared for the aunt of Mír Ṣaláḥ in her own house.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 341.) {language="en"}

[23667511] May 16, 1850 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667512] “The governor and the ‘Ulamás wrote to His Majesty reports in which their fear and perplexity were revealed. The S̱háh, hardly rid of the war in Mázindarán and enraged at the thought of another sedition in another section of his empire, urged also by his son Ṣadr-i-A‘ẓam and by the ‘ulamás who had declared a holy war, gave orders to kill the Bábís and plunder their possessions. It was on Friday the third of Rajab that the order came to Zanján.” (Ibid., pp. 341–342.) {language="en"}

[23667513] “All was bewildering confusion. The Muḥammadans were frantically running to and fro, looking for their wives, their children or their belongings. They came and went crazed, aghast, weeping over what they had to abandon. Families were separated, fathers thrusting back their sons, wives their husbands, children their mothers. Whole houses remained deserted. so great was the haste, and the governor sent soldiers to the neighboring villages to secure new recruits for the holy war.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 342.) {language="en"}

[23667514] “The Bábís, on the other hand, were not passive. They were organizing for their own protection. Ḥujjat was exhorting them never to attack but always to defend themselves. ‘Brothers,’ he would say to them, ‘do not be ashamed of me. Do not believe that because you are the companions of the Ṣáḥibu’z-Zamán you are to conquer the world by the sword. I take God as witness; they will kill you, they will burn you, they will send your heads from town to town. The only victory in store for you is to sacrifice yourselves, your wives and your possessions. God has always decreed that in every age the blood of the believers is to be the oil of the lamp of religion. You have learned of the tortures endured by the saintly martyrs of Mázindarán. They were put to death because they affirmed that the promised Mihdí had come. I say to you, whosoever has not the strength to bear such torture, let him go over to the other side for we will have to endure martyrdom. Is not our master in their power?’” (Ibid., pp. 342–343.) {language="en"}

[23667515] “Picture to yourself a Persian city. The streets are narrow, of a width of four or five or eight feet at the most. The surface unpaved has so many holes that one must proceed cautiously to avoid breaking one’s legs. The houses, with no windows opening on the street, present on both sides unbroken walls, generally about fifteen feet high and topped with a terrace without a railing, sometimes crowned by a bálá-ḵhánih or open pavilion which is usually an indication of a wealthy house. All that is of adobe or bricks baked in the sun. The uprights are of bricks baked in the kiln. This type, of venerable antiquity and in use even before historical times in the ancient cities of Mesopotamia, has many advantages: it is inexpensive, it is sanitary, it adapts itself to modest or pretentious plans; it can be a cottage or a palace entirely covered with mosaics, brilliant paintings and gold ornaments. But, as is always the case in this world, so many advantages are offset by the ease with which such dwellings crumble to pieces. Cannon balls are not needed, the rain is quite sufficient to demolish them. Thus we can visualize these famous sites covered, according to tradition, with immense cities of which nothing remains but ruins of temples and palaces and mounds scattered over the plains.<br>“In a few years whole districts vanish without leaving a trace, if the houses are not kept in repair. As all the cities of Persia are constructed after the same plan and of the same material, it is easy to visualize Zanján with her crenellated walls with high towers, her crooked streets unpaved and full of ruts. In the midst of these rose a formidable citadel called ‘House of ‘Alí-Mardán Ḵhán.’” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 197–198.) {language="en"}

[23667516] “He \[the governor of Zanján\] fearing for himself at once took measures to safeguard his authority and forwarded to Mírzá Muḥammad-Taqí Ḵhán Amír-i-Kabír a garbled account of the affair; for he was fearful lest another should acquire more influence than he possessed and so his authority and consideration should be weakened. In consequence of his representations Siyyid ‘Alí Ḵhán Lieutenant-Colonel of Fírúz-Kúh received the royal command to proceed with a numerous body of horse and foot to Zanján, and to arrest Mullá Muḥammad-‘Alí, who had retired with his followers (nearly five thousand in number) to the citadel. On his arrival Siyyid ‘Alí Ḵhán laid siege to the citadel and thus was the fire of strife kindled, and day by day the number of those slain on either side increased until at length he suffered an ignominious defeat and was obliged to ask for reinforcements from the capital. The government wished to send Ja‘far-Qulí Ḵhán, Lieutenant-Colonel, the brother of I‘timádu’d-Dawlih, but he excused himself, and said to Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán Amír-i-Kabír: ‘I’m not an Ibn-i-Zíyád to go and make war on a band of siyyids and men of learning of whose tenets I know nothing, though I should be ready enough to fight Russians Jews or other infidels.’ Other officers besides him showed a disinclination to take part in this war. Amongst these was Mír Siyyid Ḥusayn Ḵhán of Fírúz-Kúh, whom Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán the Amír dismissed and disgraced as soon as he became acquainted with his sentiments. So also many of the officers who were of the sect of the ‘Alíyu’lláhís, although they went to the war withdrew from it when they learned more of the matter. For their chief had forbidden them to fight, and therefore they fled. For it is written in their books that when the soldiers of Gúrán shall come to the capital of the king then the Lord of the Age (whom they call God) shall appear; and this prophecy was now accomplished. They also possess certain poems which contain the date of the Manifestation, and these too came true. So they were convinced that this was the Truth become manifest, and begged to be excused from taking part in the war, which thing they declared themselves unable to do. And to the Bábís they said: ‘In subsequent conflicts, when the framework of your religion shall have gathered strength, we will help you.’ In short, when the officers of the army perceived in their opponents naught but devotion, godliness, and piety, some wavered in secret and did not put forth their full strength in the war.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 138–43.) {language="en"}

[23667517] According to Gobineau (p. 198), he was the grandson of Ḥájí Muḥammad Ḥusayn Ḵhán-i-Iṣfahání. {language="en"}

