[23667278] “The minister \[Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán\] with the utmost arbitrariness, without receiving any instructions or asking permission, sent forth commands in all directions to punish and chastise the Bábí’s. Governors and magistrates sought a pretext for amassing wealth, and officials a means of acquiring profits, celebrated doctors from the summits of their pulpits incited men to make a general onslaught; the powers of the religious and the civil law linked hands and strove to eradicate and destroy this people. Now this people had not yet acquired such knowledge as was right and needful of the fundamental principles and hidden doctrines of the Báb’s teachings, and did not recognise their duties. Their conceptions and ideas were after the former fashion, and their conduct and behaviour in correspondence with ancient usage The way of approach to the Báb was, moreover, closed, and the flame of trouble visibly blazing on every side. At the decree of the most celebrated of the doctors, the government, and indeed the common people, had, with irresistible power, inaugurated rapine and plunder on all sides, and were engaged in punishing and torturing, killing and despoiling, in order that they might quench this fire and wither these poor souls. In towns where these were but a limited number all of them with bound hands became food for the sword, while in cities where they were numerous they arose in self-defence in accordance with their former beliefs, since it was impossible for them to make enquiry as to their duty, and all doors were closed.” (“Traveller’s Narrative,” pp. 34–5.) {language="en"}

[23667279] 3-4 miles (5km) {language="en"}

[23667280] “The bullet struck Siyyid Riḍá full in the chest and killed him instantly. He was a man of pure and simple ways, of deep and sincere convictions. Out of respect for his master he always walked alongside of his horse ready to meet his every need.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 294.) {language="en"}

[23667281] No one is to be slain for unbelief, for the slaying of a soul is outside the religion of God; … and if anyone commands it, he is not and has not been of the Bayán, and no sin can be greater for him than this.” (“The Bayán.” See Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, Oct. 1889, art. 12, pp. 927–8.) {language="en"}

[23667282] “But the pain and the anger redoubled the strength of Mullá Ḥusayn who with one single blow of his weapon cut in two the gun, the man and the tree.” (Mírzá Jání adds that the Bus̱hrú’í used his left hand on this occasion. The Mussulmans themselves do not question the authenticity of this anecdote.) (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 295 and note 215.) Then Jináb-i-Bábu’l-Báb turned himself about, saying: ‘Now have they made it our duty to protect ourselves’; grasped the hilt of his sword, and, acquiescing in that which the providence of God had ordained, began to defend himself. Notwithstanding his slender and fragile frame and trembling hand, such were his valour and prowess on that day that whosoever had eyes to discern the truth could clearly see that such strength and courage could only be from God, being beyond human capacity…. Then I saw Mullá Ḥusayn unsheathe his sword and raise his face towards heaven, and heard him exclaim: ‘O God I have completed the proof to this host, but it availeth not.’ Then he began to attack us on the right and on the left I swear by God that on that day he wielded the sword in such wise as transcends the power of man. Only the horsemen of Mázindarán held their ground and refused to flee. And when Mullá Ḥusayn was well warmed to the fray, he overtook a fugitive soldier. The soldier sheltered himself behind a tree, and further strove to shield himself with his musket. Mullá Ḥusayn dealt him such a blow with his sword that he clave him and the tree and the musket into six pieces.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp 49, 107–8.) {language="en"}

[23667283] 1848–9 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667284] Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán, I‘timádu’d-Dawlih, Grand Vazír and successor to Ḥájí Mírzá Áqásí. The following reference is made to him in “A Traveller’s Narrative” (pp. 32–3): “Mírzá Taqí Ḵhán Amír-Niẓám, who was Prime Minister and Chief Regent, seized in the grasp of his despotic power the reins of the affairs of the commonwealth, and urged the steed of his ambition into the arena of wilfulness and sole possession. The minister was a person devoid of experience and wanting in consideration for the consequences of actions; bloodthirsty and shameless; and swift and ready to shed blood. Severity in punishing he regarded as wise administration, and harshly entreating, distressing, intimidating, and frightening the people he considered as a fulcrum for the advancement of the monarchy. And as His Majesty the King was in the prime of youthful years the minister fell into strange fancies and sounded the drum of absolutism in (the conduct of) affairs: on his own decisive resolution, without seeking permission from the Royal Presence or taking counsel with prudent statesmen, he issued orders to persecute the Bábís, imagining that by overweening force he could eradicate and suppress matters of this nature, and that harshness would bear good fruit; whereas (in fact) to interfere with matters of conscience is simply to give them greater currency and strength; the more you strive to extinguish, the more will the name be kindled, more specially in matters of faith and religion, which spread and acquire influence so soon as blood is shed, and strongly affect men’s hearts.” {language="en"}

[23667285] “O Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667286] Qur’án, 9:52\. {language="en"}

[23667287] “‘The Bábu’l-Báb,’ says our author, ‘wishing to fulfill a religious duty and at the same time to give an example of the firm conviction of the believers, of their contempt for life, and to show the world the impiety and irreligion of the so called Mussulmans, commanded one of his followers to ascend the terrace and intone the aḏhán.’” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 295–6.) “It was at Marand,” writes Lady Sheil, “that I first heard the aḏhán, or call of the Muslims to prayer, so solemn and impressive, specially when well chanted, for it is in fact a chant…. He turned towards Mecca, and placing his open hands to his head, proclaimed with a loud sonorous voice, ‘Alláh-u-Akbar,’ which he repeated four times; then ‘As̱hhad-u-an-lá-iláh-a-illa’lláh’ (I bear witness there is no God but God), twice; then ‘As̱hhad-u-inna-Muḥammadan-Rasú’lláh’ — (I bear witness that Muḥammad is the Prophet of God), twice; then ‘I bear witness that ‘Alí, the Commander of the Faithful, is the friend of God.’… The single toll in the knell for transporting the dead to their last earthly abode arouses, perhaps from association, ideas of profound solemnity; so too does the trumpet echoing through the camp when it ushers the dragoon to his grave; but above both, in solemn awe, is the keening as it sweeps afar over the dales and hills of Munster, announcing that a Gael has been gathered to his fathers. The aḏhán excites a different impression. It raises in the mind a combination of feelings, of dignity, solemnity, and devotion, compared with which the din of bells becomes insignificant. It is an imposing thing to hear in the dead of the night the first sounds of the mu’aḏhḏhin proclaiming ‘Alláh-u-Akbar — Mighty is the Lord — I bear witness there is no God but God!’ St. Peter’s and St. Paul’s together can produce nothing equal to it.” (“Glimpses of Life and Manners in Persia,” pp. 84, 85.) {language="en"}

[23667288] “Sa‘ídu’l-‘Ulamá’ wishing to have done at any cost, gathered together as many people as he could and again began the attack in front of the caravansary. The struggle had been waging from five to six days when ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán Sardár-i-Lárijání appeared. In the meantime, and since the outbreak of the conflict, the ‘Ulamás of Bárfurús̱h exasperated by the numerous conversions which Quddús had been able to make in the city (three hundred in a week, the Muḥammadan historians admit reluctantly), referred the case to the governor of the province, Prince Ḵhanlan Mírzá. He, however, paid no attention to their grievances, having many other preoccupations.<br>“The death of Muḥammad S̱háh worried him much more than the wrangling of the Mullás and he made ready to go to Ṭihrán to pay homage to the new king, whose favor he hoped to win.<br>“Having failed in this attempt, under the pressure of events, the ‘Ulamás wrote a very urgent letter to the military chief of the province, ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán-i-Láríjání. He however, thinking it unnecessary to trouble himself, sent Muḥammad Big, Yávar (captain), at the head of three hundred men, to restore order. Thus it was that the Muḥammadans began to attack the caravansary. The struggle went on, but if ten Bábís were killed, an infinitely larger number of aggressors bit the dust. As things continued to drag along, ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán felt he should come himself in order to size up the situation.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” pp. 296–297.) {language="en"}

[23667289] Gobineau describes him in the following terms: “The Turkish and Persian nomads pass their lives in hunting, often also in fighting and above all in talking of the hunt and of war. They are brave but not always and they are well described by Branttome who, in his war experience had often encountered that type of bravery which he called ‘one day courage.’ But this is what they are in a very regular and consistent manner, great talkers, great wreckers of towns, great assassins of heroes, great exterminators of multitudes, in a word, naive, very outspoken in their sentiments, very violent in the expression of anything which arouses them and extremely amusing. ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán-i-Láríjání although well born, was a perfect type of nomad.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 171.) {language="en"}

[23667290] A notorious scoundrel who often rebelled against the government. {language="en"}

[23667291] October 10, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667292] Qur’án, 17:7\. {language="en"}

[23667293] A pipe for smoking through water. {language="en"}

[23667294] According to “A Traveller’s Narrative” (p. 36), it was Mírzá Luṭf-‘Alí, the secretary who drew his dagger and stabbed Ḵhusraw. {language="en"}

[23667295] “Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667296] “Then turning to his companions he said: ‘During these few days of life which remain to us, let us beware not to be divided and estranged by perishable riches. Let all this be held in common and let everyone share in its benefits.’ The Bábís agreed with joy and it is this marvellous spirit of self-sacrifice and this complete self-abnegation which made their enemies say that they advocated collective ownership in earthly goods and even women!” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 299.) {language="en"}

[23667297] A subdivision of a farsaḵh.   {language="en"}

[23667298] Shrine of S̱hayḵh Aḥmad-ibn-i-Abí-Ṭálib-i-Ṭabarsí, situated about fourteen miles S.E. of Bárfurús̱h. Professor Browne, of Cambridge University, visited the spot on September 26, 1888, and saw the name of the buried saint inscribed on a tablet with the form of words used for his “visitation,” the tablet hanging suspended from the railings surrounding the tomb. “It consists at present,” he writes, “of a flat, grassy enclosure surrounded by a hedge and containing, besides the buildings of the shrine and another building at the gateway (opposite to which, but outside the enclosure, stands the house of the mutavallí, or custodian of the shrine), nothing but two or three orange trees and a few rude graves covered with flat stones, the last resting places, perhaps, of some of the Bábí defenders. The building at the gateway is two storeys high, is traversed by the passage giving access to the enclosure, and is roofed with tiles. The buildings of the shrine, which stand at the farther end of the enclosure, are rather more elaborate. Their greatest length (about 20 paces) lies east and west; their breadth is about ten paces; and, besides the covered portico at the entrance they contain two rooms scantily lighted by wooden gratings over the doors. The tomb of the S̱hayḵh, from whom the place takes its name, stands surrounded by wooden railings in the centre of the inner room, to which access is obtained either by a door communicating with the outer chamber, or by a door opening externally into the enclosure.” (For plans and sketches, see the author’s translation of the “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd.”) (E. G. Browne’s “A Year Amongst the Persians,” p. 565.) {language="en"}

[23667299] October 12, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667300] Title of the Manifestation expected by Islám. {language="en"}

[23667301] July 3-August 1, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667302] April 24-May 23, 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667303] Literally “Remnant of God.” {language="en"}

[23667304] Qur’án, 11:85\. {language="en"}

[23667305] Title of the Manifestation expected by Islám. {language="en"}

[23667306] November 27, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667307] Reference to the year 1280 A.H. (1863–4 A.D.), in which Bahá’u’lláh declared His Mission in Bag̱hdád. {language="en"}

[23667308] The assembling of three hundred and thirteen chosen supporters of the imám in Ṭáliqán of Ḵhurásán is one of the signs that must needs herald the advent of the promised Qá’im. (E. G. Browne’s “A History of Persian Literature in Modern Times” \[A.D. 1500–1924\], p. 399.) {language="en"}

[23667309] Amongst them also was Riḍá Ḵhán, the son of Muḥammad Ḵhán the Turkamán, Master of the Horse to his late Majesty Muḥammad S̱háh. And he was a youth graceful of form, comely of face, endowed with all manner of talents and virtues, dignified, temperate gentle, generous, courageous, and manly. For the love and service of His Supreme Holiness he forsook both his post and his salary, and shut his eyes alike to rank and name, fame and shame, reproaches of friends and revilings of foes. At the first step he left behind him dignity, wealth, position, and all the power and consideration which he enjoyed, spent large sums of money (four or five thousand túmáns at least) in the Cause, and repeatedly showed his readiness freely to lay down his life. One of these occasions was when His Supreme Holiness arrived at the village of Ḵhánliq near Ṭihrán, and, to try the fidelity of His followers, said: ‘Were there but a few horsemen who would deliver Me from the bonds of the froward and their devices, it were not amiss.’ On hearing these words, several tried and expert horsemen, fully equipped and armed, at once prepared to set out, and, renouncing all that they had, hastily conveyed themselves before His Holiness. Amongst these were Mírzá Qurbán-‘Alí, of Astarábád, and Riḍá Ḵhán. When they were come before His Holiness, He smiled and said, “The mountain of Áḏhirbáyján has also a claim on Me,’ and bade them turn back. After his return, Riḍá Ḵhán devoted himself to the service of the friends of God, and his house was often the meeting place of the believers, amongst whom both Jináb-i-Quddús and Jináb-i-Bábu’l-Báb were for a while his honoured guests. Indeed, he neither spared himself nor fell short in the service of any of this circle, but, notwithstanding his high position, strove with heart and soul to further the object of God’s servants. When, for instance, Jináb-i-Quddús first began to preach the doctrine in Mázindarán, and the Sa‘ídu’l-‘Ulamá’, being informed of this, made strenuous efforts to do him injury, Riḍá Ḵhán at once hastened to Mázindarán, and, whenever Jináb-i-Quddús went forth from his house, used, in spite of his high position and the respect to which he was accustomed, to walk on foot before him with his drawn sword over his shoulder; seeing which, the malignants feared to take any liberty…. For some while, Riḍá Ḵhán remained after this fashion in Mázindarán, until he accompanied Jináb-i-Quddús to Mas̱hhad. On his return thence, he was present at the troubles at Badas̱ht, where he performed the most valuable services, and was entrusted with the most important and delicate commissions. After the meeting at Badas̱ht was dispersed, he fell ill, and, in company with Mírzá Sulaymán-Qulí of Núr (a son of the late S̱háṭir-Bás̱hí, also conspicuous for his virtues, learning, and devotion), came to Ṭihrán. Riḍá Ḵhán’s illness lasted for some while, and on his recovery the siege of the castle of Ṭabarsí had already waxed grievous. He at once determined to go to the assistance of the garrison. Being, however, a man of mark and well known, he could not leave the capital without giving some plausible reason. He therefore pretended to repent his former course of action, and begged that he might be sent to take part in the war in Mázindarán, and thus make amends for the past. The king granted his request, and he was appointed to accompany the force proceeding under Prince Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá against the castle. During the march thither he was continually saying to the prince, ‘I will do this,’ and ‘I will do that’, so that the prince came to entertain high hopes of him, and promised him a post commensurate with his services, for till the day when battle was inevitable and peace no longer possible, he was ever foremost in the army and most active in ordering its affairs. But on the first day of battle he began to gallop his horse and practise other martial exercises, until, without having aroused suspicion, he suddenly gave it free rein and effected a junction with the Brethren of Purity. On arriving in their midst, he kissed the knee of Jináb-i-Quddús and prostrated himself before him in thankfulness. Then he once more returned to the battle-field, and began to revile and curse the prince, saying: ‘Who is man enough to trample underfoot the pomp and circumstance of the world, free himself from the bonds of carnal lusts, and join himself, as I have done, to the saints of God? I, for my part, shall be satisfied with my head only when it falls stained with dust and blood in this plain.’ Then, like a ravening lion, he rushed upon them with naked brand, and quitted himself so manfully that all the royalist officers were astonished, saying: ‘Such valour must have been newly granted him from on high, or else a new spirit hath been breathed into his frame.’ For it happened more than once that he cut down a gunner as he was in the very act of firing his gun, while so many of the chief officers of the royalist army fell by his hand that the prince and the other commanding officers desired more eagerly to revenge themselves on him than on any other of the Bábís. Therefore, on the eve of the day appointed for Jináb-i-Quddús to surrender himself at the royalist camp, Riḍá Ḵhán, knowing that because of the fierce hatred which they bore him they would slay him with the most cruel tortures, went by night to the quarters of an officer in the camp who was an old and faithful friend and comrade. After the massacre of the other Bábís, search was made for Riḍá Ḵhán, and he was at length discovered. The officer who had sheltered him proposed to ransom him for the sum of two thousand túmáns in cash, but his proposal was rejected, and though he offered to increase the sum, and strove earnestly to save his friend, it was of no avail, for the prince, because of the exceeding hatred he bore Riḍá Ḵhán ordered him to be hewn in pieces.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 96–101.) {language="en"}

[23667310] “According to the descriptions which I have heard, the fortress erected by Mullá Ḥusayn soon became a very strong building. Its walls made of large stones reached a height of ten meters. On this base, they raised a construction made of enormous tree trunks in the middle of which they arranged a number of loopholes; they then surrounded it entirely with a deep ditch. In fact it was a kind of great tower having stones for the foundation while the higher stories were of wood and provided with three rows of loopholes where they could place as many tufang-chis as they wished, or rather, as they had. They made openings for many doors and postern gates in order to facilitate entrance and exit.<br>“They dug wells, thus securing an abundance of water; underground passages were excavated in order to provide refuge in case of need; storehouses were built and filled with all sorts of provisions either bought, or perhaps taken in the neighboring villages. Finally, they manned the fortress with the most energetic Bábís, the most devoted, and the most dependable available among them.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 156.) {language="en"}

[23667311] “Thus frantic about the maintenance of order, the Amír-Niẓám disposed quickly of the Mázindarán question. When the leading men of this province came to Ṭihrán to pay their respects to the king, they were ordered, as they departed, to take necessary measures to put an end to the sedition of the Bábís. They promised to do their best and in fact, as soon as they returned, these chiefs began to gather their forces and to deliberate. They wrote to their relations to come and join them. Ḥájí Muṣṭafá Ḵhán called for his brother ‘Abdu’lláh, ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán-i-Láríjání sent for Muḥammad-Sulṭán and ‘Alí Ḵhán of Savád-Kúh. All of these worthies decided to attack the Bábís in their fortress before they, themselves, could assume the defensive. The royal officers, seeing the chiefs of the country so willing, summoned a grand council to which hastened the lords already mentioned and also Mírzá Áqá, Mustawfí of Mázindarán, superintendent of finances, the head of the ‘Ulamás and many other men of high standing.” (Ibid., pp. 160–161.) {language="en"}

[23667312] “Prince,” “lord,” “nobleman,” “chieftain.” {language="en"}

[23667313] “On his side, the superintendent of finances raised a troop amongst the Afg̱háns domiciled at Sárí and added to it several men from the Turkish tribes under his administration. ‘Alí-Ábád, the village so severely punished by the Bábís, which aspired to avenge itself, furnished what it could and was reinforced by a party of men from Qáḍí who, being in the neighborhood, were willing to enlist.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 161.) {language="en"}

[23667314] December 1, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667315] “O Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667316] “The Amír-Niẓám grew violently angry at the news of what had happened. The description of the terrors aroused his indignation. Too far from the scene of action to appraise the wild enthusiasm of the rebels, the only conclusion he could reach was that the Bábíes should be done away with before their courage could be further stimulated by real victories. The Prince Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá, appointed lieutenant of the king in the threatened province, left with a grant of extraordinary powers. Instructions were given to draw up a list of the men who had died in the attack on the Bábís’ fortress and in the sacking of Ferra and pensions were promised to the survivors.<br>“Ḥájí Muṣṭafá Ḵhán, brother of ‘Abdu’lláh, received substantial tokens of the royal favor; in a word, all that was possible was done to restore the courage and confidence of the Mussulmans.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 164–165.) {language="en"}

[23667317] “We have left Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá running away from his burning home and wandering alone in the country, in the snow and the darkness. Toward dawn, he found himself in an unknown mountain pass, lost in a wild country, but in reality only a short distance away from the slaughter of battle. The wind brought to his ears the noise of the volleys of musketry.<br>“In this sad state, completely bewildered, he was met by a Mázindarání, mounted on a fairly good horse, who recognized him. This man dismounted, placed the Prince on his horse and offered to serve him as guide. He led him to a peasant’s hut, settled him in the barn (this is not considered a place to frown upon in Persia) and while the Prince slept and ate, the Mázindarání mounted his horse and, covering the country side, gave out the glad tidings that the Prince was safe and well. Thus he brought to him all his men, or at least a respectable number of them, one band after another.<br>“If Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá had been one of those proud spirits not easily broken by reverses, he would have considered his position only slightly altered by the mishaps of the previous evening; he could have believed that his men had been unfortunately surprised; then with the remainder of his forces he would have saved appearances and held the ground, for in fact, the Bábís had retreated and were out of sight. But the S̱háhzádih, far from priding himself on such firmness, was a weak character and, when he saw himself so well guarded, he left the barn and hurried to the village of Qádí-Kalá whence he reached Sárí in great haste. This conduct strengthened in the whole province the impression caused by the defeat of Vaskas. Panic ensued, open towns believed themselves exposed to every danger and, in spite of the rigor of the season, one could see caravans of non-combatants in great distress, taking their wives and children to the desert of Damávand to save them from the miserable dangers which the cautious conduct of S̱háhzádih seemed to foretell. When the Asiatics lose their heads they do so completely.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 169–170.) {language="en"}

[23667318] “In a few moments his army already in such confusion, was scattered by the three hundred men of Mullá Ḥusayn! Was not this the sword of the Lord and of Gideon?” (Ibid., p. 167.) {language="en"}

[23667319] According to Gobineau (p. 167), they were Sulṭán Ḥusayn Mírzá, son of Fatḥ-‘Alí S̱háh, and Dawúd Mírzá, son of Ẓillu’s-Sulṭán, uncle of the S̱háh. A. L. M. Nicolas, in his “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb” (p. 308), adds Mustawfí Mírzá ‘Abdu’l-Báqí. {language="en"}

[23667320] About thirty-five miles. {language="en"}

[23667321] December 21, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667322] O Shaykh! Things the like of which no eye hath seen have befallen this wronged one. Gladly and with the utmost resignation I have accepted to suffer, that thereby the souls of men may be enlightened and the Word of God be established. When we were imprisoned in the Land of Mim \[Mazindaran\], they one day delivered us into the hands of the ulama. the Wolf," (p. 57.) {language="en"}

[23667323] Literally “prayer-house.” {language="en"}

[23667324] Literally “black pit,” the subterranean dungeon in which Bahá’u’lláh was imprisoned. {language="en"}

[23667325] “Thus perplexed and not knowing which way to turn, S̱háhzádih, poor man, gave orders to gather together new soldiers and raise another army. The population was not eager to serve under a chief whose worth and intrepidity had not brilliantly stood the test. Nevertheless, by the help of money and through promises, the Mullás particularly, who did not lose sight of their interests, and who had the most at stake, displayed such zeal that in the end a fair number of tufang-chis were assembled. As for the mounted soldiers of the various tribes, from the moment their chiefs mount their horses, they do likewise without even asking why.<br>“‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán-i-Láríjání obeyed without hesitation the order to send new recruits. This time however, either through distrust of a Prince whose ineptitude might endanger the lives of his relatives and subjects, or because ambitious to distinguish himself, he no longer gave anyone the command of his forces. He led them himself by a daring move and, instead of rejoining the royal army, he went straight on to attack the Bábís in their refuge. Then he gave notice to the Prince that he had arrived at the fortress of S̱hayḵh Ṭabarsí and that he was besieging it. Besides, he notified him that he had no need of assistance nor of support, that his forces were more than adequate and that, if his royal highness would see for himself how he, ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán-i-Láríjání was about to treat the rebels, he would be both honored and gratified.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 170–171.) {language="en"}

[23667326] “Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá could not pass for a bold warrior, as we have just seen, but he substituted for an excessive intrepidity another quality very useful to a general, he did not take literally the boastings of his lieutenants. Therefore, fearing that ill might befall this impudent nomad, he sent him reinforcements immediately. Thus departed in great haste Muḥsin Ḵhán-i-As̱hrafí with his cavalry, a troop of  Afg̱háns, Muḥammad-Karím Ḵhán-i-As̱hrafí with some of the tufang-chis of the town, and Ḵhalíl Ḵhán of Savád-Kúh with the men of Qádí-Kalá.” (Ibid., p. 171.) {language="en"}

[23667327] February 1, 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667328] “O Lord of the Age.” One of the titles of the promised Qá’im. {language="en"}

[23667329] “Although seriously wounded, the Bábí chief continued, nevertheless, to give orders and to lead and stimulate his men until, seeing that little more could be gained, he gave the signal to retreat, remaining himself with the rear guard.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 174.) {language="en"}

[23667330] “His \[Mullá Ḥusayn’s\] mortal remains still repose in the little inner room of the shrine of S̱hayḵh Ṭabarsí where, at the direction of Mullá Muḥammad-‘Alí Bárfurús̱hí, they were reverently laid by the hands of his sorrowing comrades in the beginning of the year A.D. 1849.” (“A Traveller’s Narrative,” Note F, p. 245.) {language="en"}

[23667331] October 10, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667332] February 2, 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667333] October 10, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667334] December 1, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667335] December 21, 1848 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667336] “Among them was Mullá Ḥusayn, who was made the recipient of the effulgent glory of the Sun of Revelation. But for him, God would not have been established upon the seat of His mercy, nor ascended the throne of eternal glory.” (The “Kitáb-i-Íqán,” p. 188.) See note 5, p. 23\. “Frail of form, but a gallant soldier and an impassioned lover of God he combined qualities and characteristics which even in the spiritual aristocracy of Persia are seldom found united in the same person.” (Dr. T. K. Cheyne’s “The Reconciliation of Races and Religions,” p. 83.) “At last,” writes Gobineau, “he passed away. The new religion, which found in him its first martyr, lost, in the same stroke, a man whose moral strength and ability would have been of great value to it, had he lived longer. The Muḥammadans naturally feel a hatred for the memory of this leader, which is as deep as the love and veneration shown for him by the Bábís. They can both justify their opposing sentiments. What is certain is that Mullá Ḥusayn-i-Bus̱hrú’í was the first to give to Bábism, in the Persian empire, the status which a religious or political body acquires in the eyes of the people only after it has demonstrated its warlike strength.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 176.) “The late Ḥájí Mírzá Jání writes: ‘I myself met him \[Mírzá Muḥammad-Ḥasan, the younger brother of Mullá Ḥusayn\] when he was bringing his mother and sister from Karbilá to Qazvín and from Qazvín to Ṭihrán. His sister was the wife of S̱hayḵh Abú-Turáb of Qazvín, who was a scholar and philosopher such at is rarely met with and believed with the utmost sincerity and purity of purpose, while such was his love and devotion to the Báb that if anyone did so much as mention the name of His Supreme Holiness (the souls of all beside him be His sacrifice) he could not restrain his tears. Often have I seen him, when engaged in the perusal of the writings of His Supreme Holiness, become almost beside himself with rapture, and nearly faint with joy. Of his wife he used to say: “I married her three years ago in Karbilá. She was then but an indifferent scholar even in Persian, but now she can expound texts from the Qur’án and explain the most difficult questions and most subtle points of the doctrine of the Divine Unity in such wise that I have never seen a man who was her equal in this, or in readiness of apprehension. These gifts she has obtained by the blessing of His Holiness the Supreme and through converse with her holiness the Pure (Qurratu’l-‘Ayn). I have seen in her a patience and resignation rare even in the most self-denying men, for during these three years, though I have not sent her a single dinar for her expenses and she has supported herself only with the greatest difficulty, she has never uttered a word; and now that she has come to Ṭihrán, she refrains altogether from speaking of the past, and though, in accordance with the wishes of Jináb-i-Bábu’l-Báb, she now desires to proceed to Ḵhurásán, and has literally nothing to put on save one well-worn dress which she wears, she never asks for clothes or travelling-money, but ever seeks reasonable excuses wherewith to set me at my ease and prevent me from feeling ashamed. Her purity, chastity, and virtue are boundless, and during all this while no unprivileged person hath so much as heard her voice.” But the virtues of the daughter were surpassed by those of the mother, who possessed rare attainments and accomplishments, and had composed many poems and eloquent elegies on the afflictions of her sons. Although Jináb-i-Bábu’l-Báb had warned her of his approaching martyrdom and foretold to her all the impending calamities, she still continued to exhibit the same eager devotion and cheerful resignation, rejoicing that God had accepted the sacrifice of her sons, and even praying that they might attain to this great dignity and not be deprived of so great blessedness. It is indeed wonderful to meditate on this virtuous and saintly family, the sons so conspicuous for their single-minded devotion and self-sacrifice, the mother and daughter so patient and resigned. When I, Mírzá Jání, met Mírzá Muḥammad-Ḥasan, he was but seventeen years of age, yet I observed in him a dignity, gravity, composure, and virtue which amazed me. After the death of Jináb-i-Bábu’l-Báb, Ḥaḍrat-i-Quddús bestowed on him the sword and turban of that glorious martyr, and made him captain of the troops of the True King. As to his martyrdom, there is a difference of opinion as to whether he was slain at the breakfast-table in the camp, or suffered martyrdom with Jináb-i-Quddús in the square of Bárfurús̱h.’” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 93–5.) The sister of Mullá Ḥusayn was surnamed “Varaqatu’l-Firdaws” and was intimately associated, while in Karbilá, with Ṭáhirih. (“Memorials of the Faithful,” p. 270.) {language="en"}

[23667337] About fifteen miles. {language="en"}

[23667338] “This time the terror knew no bounds; throughout the province the people, deeply aroused by the repeated defeats of Islám, were beginning to lean toward the new religion. The military leaders felt their authority tottering, the religious chiefs saw their power over souls waning; the situation was extremely critical and the least incident might place the province completely under the influence of the Reformer.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 315.)<br>“But when the Sa‘ídu’l-‘Ulamá’ was informed of this, he (fearing lest the Bábís should enter Bárfurús̱h and mete out to him the punishment which he deserved) was overcome with trouble and consternation, and wrote several successive letters to ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán, saying: ‘I congratulate you on your courage and discretion, but how much to be deplored it is that after you have been at such pains, lost so many of your kinsmen, and gained at length so signal a victory, you did not follow it up. You have made a great multitude food for the sword, and have returned, leaving only a few decrepit old men as survivors. Alas, that, after all your efforts and perseverance, the prince is now prepared to march against the castle and take captive these few poor wretches, so that after all he will get the credit of this signal victory, and will appropriate to himself all the money and property of the vanquished! You must make it your first and most important business to return to the castle ere he has set out, for the government of a province like Mázindarán is not a thing to be trifled with. Strive, then, to gain the entire credit of this victory, and let your exertions accomplish what your zeal has begun.’ He also wrote at great length to the clergy of Ámul urgently exhorting them to use their best endeavours to make the Sartíp ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán start at once without further delay. So they continued too remind him incessantly that it was his duty to march with all speed against the castle; and the Sartíp, though he knew that what the Sa‘ídu’l-‘Ulamá’ had written to him was utterly false and baseless, was eager, if it should be possible, to make some amends for what had passed, and so to clear himself in some measure of the disgrace which he had incurred in the eyes of the Láríjání women whose husbands he had sacrificed, and of the government. But inwardly he was consumed with anxiety, fearing that, as in the previous campaign, he might fail to accomplish anything. Most of his men, too, were wounded, while many had fled and concealed themselves in the surrounding villages distant four or five farsangs from the city. So, as a makeshift, he wrote to the clergy of Ámul, saying: ‘If indeed this be a religious war, you, who are such zealous champions of the Faith, and to whom men look for example, should take the lead, and make the first move, so that others may follow you.’ The clergy, not being prepared with a suitable answer, and seeing no way of excusing themselves, were obliged to send a message to the effect that the war was a religious war. A great company of tradesmen, common people, and roughs was assembled, and these, with the clergy and students, set out, ostensibly for the accomplishment of a religious duty, but really bent on plunder and rapine. Most of these went to Bárfurús̱h and there joined the advance of Prince Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá, who, on reaching a village distant one farsang from the castle, sent a body of his men to reconnoitre and collect information about the movements of the Bábí garrison.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 72–3.) {language="en"}

[23667339] “The reverend divines, who with their pupils, had come to take part in the holy war, were scarce able to sleep at night for fear (though their quarters were in a place distant two farsangs from the castle), and continually in their conversation would they roundly abuse the prince and ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán and curse the Sa‘ídu’l-‘Ulamá’; ‘for,’ said they, ‘these have, without sufficient reason, taken us away from our studies, our discussions, and the earning of our livelihood, besides bringing us into dire peril; since to fight with men like these, who have renounced the world and carry their lives in their hands, is to incur great risk.’ So the holy verse, ‘Cast not yourselves into peril with your own hands,’ became their daily utterance. One said: ‘Certain circumstances exonerate me from the duty of taking part in this war at present.’ Another (adducing thirty different pretexts) said: I am lawfully excused and am compelled to turn back.’ A third said: ‘I have little children dependant on me; what can I do?’ A fourth said: ‘I have made no provision for my wife, so I must go, but, should it be necessary, I will return again.’ A fifth said: ‘My accounts with certain persons are not yet settled; should I fall a martyr my wealth will be wasted and an injustice will be done to my wife and children; and both waste and injustice are condemned as repugnant to our holy religion and displeasing to God.’ A sixth said: ‘I owe money to certain persons and have none to acquit me of my debt. Should I fall my debt will not allow me to cross the Bridge of Ṣiráṭ.’ A seventh said: ‘I came away without the knowledge of my mother, and she had said to me: “Shouldst thou go I will make the milk wherewith I nourished thee unlawful to thee.” I fear, therefore, that I may be cast off as undutiful by my mother.’ An eighth wept, saying: ‘I have made a vow to visit Karbilá this year; one circumambulation of the holy sepulchre of the Chief of Martyrs is equivalent in merit to a hundred thousand martyrdoms or a thousand pilgrimages to Mecca. I fear to fail in the fulfilment of my vow and to be disappointed of this great blessing.’ Others said: ‘We for our part, have neither seen in these people, nor heard of them aught that showeth them to be unbelievers, for they also say: “There is no god but God, Muḥammad is the Apostle of God and ‘Alí is the Friend of God.” At most, they maintain that the advent of the Imám Mihdí has taken place. Let them be; for at all events they are no worse than the sunnís who reject the twelve Imáms and the fourteen immaculate saints, recognise such an one as Umar as caliph, prefer ‘Uṯhmán to ‘Alí-ibn-i-Abí-Ṭálib, and accept Abú-Bakr as the successor of our holy Prophet. Why should our divines leave those alone and fight with these about matter whereof the rights and wrongs have not been properly determined?’ In short throughout the camp, murmurs arose from every tongue, and complaints from every mouth; each one sang a different tune and devised a different pretext; and all awaited but some plausible excuse to betake themselves to flight. So when ‘Abbás-Qulí Ḵhán perceived this to be the case, he, fearing lest the contagion of their terror might spread to his soldiers, was forced to accept the excuses of these reverend divines and their disciples and followers, who forthwith departed, rejoicing greatly, and uttering prayers for the Sartíp’s success.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 74–6.) {language="en"}

[23667340] “Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá was somewhat surprised. He felt deeply disappointed, but what impressed him even more was that the Sardár could be considered as having been defeated as well as he, and this thought, flattering to his self-love, brought him no little pleasure. Not only did he no longer fear that one of his lieutenants might have won an enviable glory in taking the fortress of the Bábís; but it was not he himself alone who had failed; he had a companion in misfortune and a companion whom he would succeed in proving responsible for the two defeats. Overjoyed he called together his chiefs great and small and apprised them of the news, deploring of course the tragic fate of the Sardár and expressing the ardent hope that this valiant soldier might be more fortunate in the future.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” p. 179.) {language="en"}

[23667341] 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667342] “The Prince assigned to each one his post during the siege; he entrusted Ḥájí Ḵhán Núrí and Mírzá ‘Abdu’lláh Navayy with the responsibility of securing adequate supplies. As military leaders, he selected the Sardár ‘Abbás-Qulí-Ḵhán-i-Láríjání, towards whom, since his recent failure, he was showing more sympathy; then Naṣru’lláh Ḵhán-i-Bandibí, another chieftain, and Muṣṭafá Ḵhán from As̱hraf to whom he gave the command of the brave tufang-chis of that city and also the command of the suritis. Other lesser lords led the men of Dudankih and Bálá-Rastáq as well as several Turkish and Kurdish nomads who were not included in the bands of the great chiefs. These nomads were entrusted with the special duty of watching every move of the enemy. Past experience had convinced them that they should be more vigilant in the future. Turks and Kurds were given therefore the responsibility of following, night and day, the operations of the enemy and to be ever on the alert in order to prevent possible surprises.” (Ibid., p. 181.) {language="en"}

[23667343] “Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá, however, wished to combine recent strategy with old military technique and ordered to be brought from Ṭihrán two cannon and two mortars with the necessary ammunition. He also enlisted the assistance of a man from Hirát who had discovered an explosive substance which could project flames to a distance of seven hundred meters and set fire to anything combustible within that radius. A trial test was made and it proved satisfactory; the burning material was shot out into the fort, a conflagration started immediately and all the dwellings or shelters whether of wood, of reeds or of straw, which the Bábís had erected, either within the enclosure or upon the walls, were reduced to ashes.<br>“While this destruction went on, the bombs and bullets shot from the mortars seriously damaged a building hastily erected by men who were neither architects nor engineers and had never anticipated an artillery attack. In a very short time, the outer defences of the fortress were dismantled; nothing was left of them but fallen girders, smoked and burning timbers, scattered stones.” (Ibid., pp. 181–182.) {language="en"}

[23667344] “After taking these precautions, they dug holes and trenches for the use of the tufang-chis who were ordered to shoot down any Bábís who might appear. They built large towers as high as the various levels of the fortress or even higher and, through a continuous plunging fire, they rendered the circulation of the Bábís within their fort extremely dangerous. It was a decided advantage for the besiegers, but, in a few days, the Bábí chiefs, taking advantage of the long nights, raised their fortifications so that their height exceeded that of the attacking towers of the enemy.” (Ibid., p. 181.) {language="en"}

[23667345] The ninth day after Naw-Rúz. {language="en"}

[23667346] “Once indeed, some few of them did go out to try to obtain a little tea and sugar for Jináb-i-Quddús. The most notable of these was Mullá Sa‘íd of Zarkanád. Now he was a man so accomplished in science that when certain learned men of the kindred of Mullá Muḥammad-Taqí of Núr addressed to Jináb-i-Quddús in writing certain questions touching the science of divination and astrology, the latter said to Mullá Sa‘íd: ‘Do you speedily write for them a brief and compendious reply that their messenger be not kept waiting and a more detailed answer shall be written subsequently.’ So Mullá Sa‘íd though hurried by the presence of the messenger and distracted by the turmoil of the siege rapidly penned a most eloquent address wherein while replying to the questions asked he introduced nearly a hundred well-authenticated traditions bearing on the truth of the new Manifestation of the promised Proof besides several which foreshadowed the halting of those who had believed in the Lord about Ṭabarsí and their martyrdom. The learned men of Núr were amazed beyond all measure at his erudition and said: ‘Candour compels us to admit that such a presentation of these matters is a great miracle, and that such erudition and eloquence are far beyond the Mullá Sa‘íd whom we knew. Assuredly this talent hath been bestowed on him from on high and he in turn hath made it manifest to us.’ Now Mullá Sa‘íd and his companions, while they were without the castle fell into the hands of the royal troops and were by them carried before the prince. The prince strove by every means to extract from them some information about the state of the Bábí garrison, their numbers and the amount of their munitions; but do what he would, he could gain nothing. So when he perceived Mullá Sa‘íd to be a man of talent and understanding he said to him: ‘Repent, and I will release you and not suffer you to be slain.’ To this Mullá Sa‘íd replied ‘Never did anyone repent of obedience to God’s command; why then should I? Rather do you repent who are acting contrary to His good pleasure, and more evilly than anyone hath heretofore done.’ And he spoke much more after the same fashion. So at length they sent him to Sárí in chains and fetters and there slew him under circumstances of the utmost cruelty along with his companions, who appear to have been five in number.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 79–80.) {language="en"}

[23667347] The one who sounds the Aḏhán, the Muḥammadan call to prayer. {language="en"}

[23667348] “Thus the latter constructed four towers on the four sides of the castle, and raised them so high that they were able to command the interior of the fortress with their guns, and to make the garrison targets for their bullets. Then the faithful, seeing this, began to dig subterranean passages and to retreat thither. But the ground of Mázindarán lies near the water and is saturated with moisture, added to which rain fell continually, increasing the damage, so that these poor sufferers dwelt amidst mud and water till their garments rotted away with damp…. Whenever one of their comrades quaffed the draught of martyrdom before their eyes, instead of grieving they rejoiced. Thus, for instance, on one occasion bomb-shell fell on the roof of a hut, which caught fire. S̱hayḵh Ṣáliḥ of S̱híráz went to extinguish the fire. A bullet struck his head and shattered his skull. Even as they were raising his corpse a second bullet carried away the hand of Áqá Mírzá Muḥammad ‘Alí, the son of Siyyid Aḥmad who was the father of Áqá Siyyid Ḥusayn, ‘the beloved.’ So too, was Áqá Siyyid Ḥusayn ‘the beloved,’ a child ten years of age slain before his father’s eyes and he fell rolling in mud and gore, with limbs quivering like those of a half-killed bird.” (The “Táríḵh\-i-Jadíd,” pp. 81–3.) {language="en"}

[23667349] “This state of affairs had lasted four months. The S̱háh began to grow impatient. The success of the Bábís aroused his anger which according to the Persian historian he expressed thus: ‘We thought that our army would go without hesitation through fire and water, that, fearless, it would fight a lion or a whale, but we have sent it to fight a handful of weak and defenseless men and it has achieved nothing! Do the notables of Mázindarán think that we approve of this delay? Is it their policy to allow this conflagration to spread in order to magnify their importance in case they later put an end to it? Very well, let them know that I shall act as though Alláh had never created Mázindarán and I shall exterminate its inhabitants to the last man!” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 322.) {language="en"}

[23667350] “The siege had been going on for four months and had made no visible progress. The old fortifications had been destroyed but, with indomitable energy, the Bábís had built new ones and, night and day, they restored and enlarged them. It was impossible to foresee the outcome of this situation, the more so because, as I have already said, Mázindarán was not the only region in Persia where the devotees of the new Faith were giving evidence of their zeal and their daring. The King and the prime minister, in their anxiety, burst forth into abuse against their lieutenants. Not only did they charge them with incompetence, in the most bitter terms, but they threatened to extend to them the same treatment planned for the Bábís, if a final settlement were not reached without delay. Thereupon, the command was taken from Mihdí-Qulí Mírzá and given to the Afs̱hár Sulaymán Ḵhán, a man of acknowledged firmness and of great influence, not only in his own tribe, one of the noblest in Persia, but throughout the military circles who knew him and held him in high esteem. He was given the most rigorous orders.” (Comte de Gobineau’s “Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l’Asie Centrale,” pp. 183–184.)  <br>…”Those who remained firm had already consumed not only all their food supply, but such grass as they could find in the enclosure and the bark of all the trees. There remained only the leather of their belts and the scabbards of their swords. They had to resort to the expedient recommended by the Spanish ambassador to the soldiers of the league besieged in Paris; they ground the bones of the dead and made flour with the dust thereof. At last, desperate, they were reduced to perpetrate a sort of profanation. The horse of Mullá Ḥusayn had died of the wounds suffered during that fatal night which witnessed the death of its master. The Bábís had buried it out of regard for their holy leader and a little of the deep veneration which all felt for him hovered over the grave of the poor animal. They held council and, deploring the necessity for such a discussion, they debated the question whether extreme distress could justify them to disinter the sacred charger and eat the remains. With deep sorrow, they agreed that the deed was justifiable. They cooked the remains of the horse with the flour made from the bones of the dead, they ate this strange mixture and took up their guns once more!” (Ibid., pp 186–187.) {language="en"}

[23667351] ‘Abdu’l-Bahá refers, in the “Memorials of the Faithful” (pp. 16–17) to the hardships and sufferings endured by the heroic defenders of the fort of S̱hayḵh Ṭabarsí He pays a glowing tribute to the constancy, the zeal and courage of the besieged, mentioning in particular Mullá Ṣádiq-i-Muqaddas. “For eighteen days,” He says, “they remained without food. They lived on the leather of their shoes. This too was soon consumed, and they had nothing left but water. They drank a mouthful every morning and lay famished and exhausted in their fort. When attacked, however, they would instantly spring to their feet, and manifest in the face of the enemy a magnificent courage and astonishing resistance…. Under such circumstances to maintain an unwavering faith and patience is extremely difficult, and to endure such dire afflictions a rare phenomenon.” {language="en"}

[23667352] April 24-May 23, 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667353] “Order,” “command,” “royal decree.” {language="en"}

[23667354] Reference to God, the word Raḥmán meaning “merciful.” {language="en"}

[23667355] May 9, 1849 A.D. {language="en"}

[23667356] “This stark and desperate bravery, this unquenchable enthusiasm gave grave concern to the leaders of the imperial army. Despairing to break through the fortification after repeated defeats, they thought of resorting to shrewdness. The Prince was naturally shrewd and Sulaymán Ḵhán-i-Afs̱hár, recently sent by the S̱háh, was urging such a method, fearful that longer delays might endanger his prestige and his life.” (A. L. M. Nicolas’ “Siyyid ‘Alí-Muḥammad dit le Báb,” p. 325.) {language="en"}

[23667357] Qur’án, 7:88\. {language="en"}

